                              CANNERY ROW

Cannery Row in Monterey in California is a poem, a stink, a grating
noise, a quality of light, a tone, a habit, a nostalgia, a dream.
Cannery Row is the gathered and scattered, tin and iron and rust and
splintered wood, chipped pavement and weedy lots and junk heaps, sardine
canneries of corrugated iron, honky tonks, restaurants and whore houses,
and little crowded groceries, and laboratories and flophouses. Its
inhabitants are, as the man once said, “whores, pimps, gamblers, and
sons of bitches,” by which he meant Everybody. Had the man looked
through another peephole he might have said, “Saints and angels and
martyrs and holy men,” and he would have meant the same thing.

In the morning when the sardine fleet has made a catch, the
purse-seiners waddle heavily into the bay blowing their whistles. The
deep-laden boats pull in against the coast where the canneries dip their
tails into the bay. The figure is advisedly chosen, for if the canneries
dipped their mouths into the bay the canned sardines which emerge from
the other end would be metaphorically, at least, even more horrifying.
Then cannery whistles scream and all over the town men and women
scramble into their clothes and come running down to the Row to go to
work. Then shining cars bring the upper classes down: superintendents,
accountants, owners who disappear into offices. Then from the town pour
Wops and Chinamen and Polaks, men and women in trousers and rubber coats
and oilcloth aprons. They come running to clean and cut and pack and
cook and can the fish. The whole street rumbles and groans and screams
and rattles while the silver rivers of fish pour in out of the boats and
the boats rise higher and higher in the water until they are empty. The
canneries rumble and rattle and squeak until the last fish is cleaned
and cut and cooked and canned and then the whistles scream again and the
dripping, smelly, tired Wops and Chinamen and Polaks, men and women,
straggle out and droop their ways up the hill into the town and Cannery
Row becomes itself again—quiet and magical. Its normal life returns.
The bums who retired in disgust under the black cypress tree come out to
sit on the rusty pipes in the vacant lot. The girls from Dora’s emerge
for a bit of sun if there is any. Doc strolls from the Western
Biological Laboratory and crosses the street to Lee Chong’s grocery for
two quarts of beer. Henri the painter noses like an Airedale through the
junk in the grass-grown lot for some part or piece of wood or metal he
needs for the boat he is building. Then the darkness edges in and the
street light comes on in front of Dora’s—the lamp which makes perpetual
moonlight in Cannery Row. Callers arrive at Western Biological to see
Doc, and he crosses the street to Lee Chong’s for five quarts of beer.

How can the poem and the stink and the grating noise—the quality of
light, the tone, the habit and the dream—be set down alive? When you
collect marine animals there are certain flat worms so delicate that
they are almost impossible to capture whole, for they break and tatter
under the touch. You must let them ooze and crawl of their own will onto
a knife blade and then lift them gently into your bottle of sea water.
And perhaps that might be the way to write this book—to open the page
and to let the stories crawl in by themselves.




                               CHAPTER 1

LEE CHONG’S grocery, while not a model of neatness, was a miracle of
supply. It was small and crowded but within its single room a man could
find everything he needed or wanted to live and to be happy—clothes,
food, both fresh and canned, liquor, tobacco, fishing equipment,
machinery, boats, cordage, caps, pork chops. You could buy at Lee
Chong’s a pair of slippers, a silk kimono, a quarter pint of whiskey and
a cigar. You could work out combinations to fit almost any mood. The one
commodity Lee Chong did not keep could be had across the lot at Dora’s.

The grocery opened at dawn and did not close until the last wandering
vagrant dime had been spent or retired for the night. Not that Lee Chong
was avaricious. He wasn’t, but if one wanted to spend money, he was
available. Lee’s position in the community surprised him as much as he
could be surprised. Over the course of the years everyone in Cannery Row
owed him money. He never pressed his clients, but when the bill became
too large, Lee cut off credit. Rather than walk into the town up the
hill, the client usually paid or tried to.

Lee was round-faced and courteous. He spoke a stately English without
ever using the letter R. When the tong wars were going on in California,
it happened now and then that Lee found a price on his head. Then he
would go secretly to San Francisco and enter a hospital until the
trouble blew over. What he did with his money, no one ever knew. Perhaps
he didn’t get it. Maybe his wealth was entirely in unpaid bills. But he
lived well and he had the respect of all his neighbors. He trusted his
clients until further trust became ridiculous. Sometimes he made
business errors, but even these he turned to advantage in good will if
in no other way. It was that way with the Palace Flophouse and Grill.
Anyone but Lee Chong would have considered the transaction a total loss.

Lee Chong’s station in the grocery was behind the cigar counter. The
cash register was then on his left and the abacus on his right. Inside
the glass case were the brown cigars, the cigarettes, the Bull Durham,
the Duke’s mixture, the Five Brothers, while behind him in racks on the
wall were the pints, half pints and quarters of Old Green River, Old
Town House, Old Colonel, and the favorite—Old Tennessee, a blended
whiskey guaranteed four months old, very cheap and known in the
neighborhood as Old Tennis Shoes. Lee Chong did not stand between the
whiskey and the customer without reason. Some very practical minds had
on occasion tried to divert his attention to another part of the store.
Cousins, nephews, sons and daughters-in-law waited on the rest of the
store, but Lee never left the cigar counter. The top of the glass was
his desk. His fat delicate hands rested on the glass, the fingers moving
like small restless sausages. A broad golden wedding ring on the middle
finger of his left hand was his only jewelry and with it he silently
tapped on the rubber change mat from which the little rubber tits had
long been worn. Lee’s mouth was full and benevolent and the flash of
gold when he smiled was rich and warm. He wore half-glasses and since he
looked at everything through them, he had to tilt his head back to see
in the distance. Interest and discounts, addition, subtraction he worked
out on the abacus with his little restless sausage fingers, and his
brown friendly eyes roved over the grocery and his teeth flashed at the
customers.

On an evening when he stood in his place on a pad of newspaper to keep
his feet warm, he contemplated with humor and sadness a business deal
that had been consummated that afternoon and reconsummated later that
same afternoon. When you leave the grocery, if you walk catty-cornered
across the grass-grown lot, threading your way among the great rusty
pipes thrown out of the canneries, you will see a path worn in the
weeds. Follow it past the cypress tree, across the railroad track, up a
chicken walk with cleats, and you will come to a long low building which
for a long time was used as a storage place for fish meal. It was just a
great big roofed room and it belonged to a worried gentleman named
Horace Abbeville. Horace had two wives and six children and over a
period of years he had managed through pleading and persuasion to build
a grocery debt second to none in Monterey. That afternoon he had come
into the grocery and his sensitive tired face had flinched at the shadow
of sternness that crossed Lee’s face. Lee’s fat finger tapped the rubber
mat. Horace laid his hands palm up on the cigar counter. “I guess I owe
you plenty dough,” he said simply.

Lee’s teeth flashed up in appreciation of an approach so different from
any he had ever heard. He nodded gravely, but he waited for the trick to
develop.

Horace wet his lips with his tongue, a good job from corner to corner.
“I hate to have my kids with that hanging over them,” he said. “Why, I
bet you wouldn’t let them have a pack of spearmint now.”

Lee Chong’s face agreed with this conclusion. “Plenty dough,” he said.

Horace continued, “You know that place of mine across the track up there
where the fish meal is.”

Lee Chong nodded. It was his fish meal.

Horace said earnestly, “If I was to give you that place—would it clear
me up with you?”

Lee Chong tilted his head back and stared at Horace through his
half-glasses while his mind flicked among accounts and his right hand
moved restlessly to the abacus. He considered the construction which was
flimsy and the lot which might be valuable if a cannery ever wanted to
expand. “Shu,” said Lee Chong.

“Well, get out the accounts and I’ll make you a bill of sale on that
place.” Horace seemed in a hurry.

“No need papers,” said Lee. “I make paid-in-full paper.”

They finished the deal with dignity and Lee Chong threw in a quarter
pint of Old Tennis Shoes. And then Horace Abbeville walking very
straight went across the lot and past the cypress tree and across the
track and up the chicken walk and into the building that had been his,
and he shot himself on a heap of fish meal. And although it has nothing
to do with this story, no Abbeville child, no matter who its mother was,
knew the lack of a stick of spearmint ever afterward.

But to get back to the evening. Horace was on the trestles with the
embalming needles in him, and his two wives were sitting on the steps of
his house with their arms about each other (they were good friends until
after the funeral, and then they divided up the children and never spoke
to each other again). Lee Chong stood in back of the cigar counter and
his nice brown eyes were turned inward on a calm and eternal Chinese
sorrow. He knew he could not have helped it, but he wished he might have
known and perhaps tried to help. It was deeply a part of Lee’s kindness
and understanding that man’s right to kill himself is inviolable, but
sometimes a friend can make it unnecessary. Lee had already underwritten
the funeral and sent a wash basket of groceries to the stricken
families.

Now Lee Chong owned the Abbeville building—a good roof, a good floor,
two windows and a door. True it was piled high with fish meal and the
smell of it was delicate and penetrating. Lee Chong considered it as a
storehouse for groceries, as a kind of warehouse, but he gave that up on
second thought. It was too far away and anyone can go in through a
window. He was tapping the rubber mat with his gold ring and considering
the problem when the door opened and Mack came in. Mack was the elder,
leader, mentor, and to a small extent the exploiter of a little group of
men who had in common no families, no money, and no ambitions beyond
food, drink, and contentment. But whereas most men in their search for
contentment destroy themselves and fall wearily short of their targets,
Mack and his friends approached contentment casually, quietly, and
absorbed it gently. Mack and Hazel, a young man of great strength, Eddie
who filled in as a bartender at La Ida, Hughie and Jones who
occasionally collected frogs and cats for Western Biological, were
currently living in those large rusty pipes in the lot next to Lee
Chong’s. That is, they lived in the pipes when it was damp but in fine
weather they lived in the shadow of the black cypress tree at the top of
the lot. The limbs folded down and made a canopy under which a man could
lie and look out at the flow and vitality of Cannery Row.

Lee Chong stiffened ever so slightly when Mack came in and his eyes
glanced quickly about the store to make sure that Eddie or Hazel or
Hughie or Jones had not come in too and drifted away among the
groceries.

Mack laid out his cards with a winning honesty. “Lee,” he said, “I and
Eddie and the rest heard you own the Abbeville place.”

Lee Chong nodded and waited.

“I and my friends thought we’d ast you if we could move in there. We’ll
keep up the property,” he added quickly. “Wouldn’t let anybody break in
or hurt anything. Kids might knock out the windows, you know—” Mack
suggested. “Place might burn down if somebody don’t keep an eye on it.”

Lee tilted his head back and looked into Mack’s eyes through the
half-glasses and Lee’s tapping finger slowed its tempo as he thought
deeply. In Mack’s eyes there was good will and good fellowship and a
desire to make everyone happy. Why then did Lee Chong feel slightly
surrounded? Why did his mind pick its way as delicately as a cat through
cactus? It had been sweetly done, almost in a spirit of philanthropy.
Lee’s mind leaped ahead at the possibilities—no, they were
probabilities, and his finger tapping slowed still further. He saw
himself refusing Mack’s request and he saw the broken glass from the
windows. Then Mack would offer a second time to watch over and preserve
Lee’s property—and at the second refusal, Lee could smell the smoke,
could see the little flames creeping up the walls. Mack and his friends
would try to help to put it out. Lee’s finger came to a gentle rest on
the change mat. He was beaten. He knew that. There was left to him only
the possibility of saving face and Mack was likely to be very generous
about that. Lee said, “You like pay lent my place? You like live there
same hotel?”

Mack smiled broadly and he was generous. “Say—” he cried. “That’s an
idear. Sure. How much?”

Lee considered. He knew it didn’t matter what he charged. He wasn’t
going to get it anyway. He might just as well make it a really sturdy
face-saving sum. “Fi’ dolla’ week,” said Lee.

Mack played it through to the end. “I’ll have to talk to the boys about
it,” he said dubiously. “Couldn’t you make that four dollars a week?”

“Fi’ dolla’,” said Lee firmly.

“Well, I’ll see what the boys say,” said Mack.

And that was the way it was. Everyone was happy about it. And if it be
thought that Lee Chong suffered a total loss, at least his mind did not
work that way. The windows were not broken. Fire did not break out, and
while no rent was ever paid, if the tenants ever had any money, and
quite often they did have, it never occurred to them to spend it any
place except at Lee Chong’s grocery. What he had was a little group of
active and potential customers under wraps. But it went further than
that. If a drunk caused trouble in the grocery, if the kids swarmed down
from New Monterey intent on plunder, Lee Chong had only to call and his
tenants rushed to his aid. One further bond it established—you cannot
steal from your benefactor. The saving to Lee Chong in cans of beans and
tomatoes and milk and watermelons more than paid the rent. And if there
was a sudden and increased leakage among the groceries in New Monterey
that was none of Lee Chong’s affair.

The boys moved in and the fish meal moved out. No one knows who named
the house that has been known ever after as the Palace Flophouse and
Grill. In the pipes and under the cypress tree there had been no room
for furniture and the little niceties which are not only the diagnoses
but the boundaries of our civilization. Once in the Palace Flophouse,
the boys set about furnishing it. A chair appeared and a cot and another
chair. A hardware store supplied a can of red paint not reluctantly
because it never knew about it, and as a new table or footstool appeared
it was painted, which not only made it very pretty but also disguised it
to a certain extent in case a former owner looked in. And the Palace
Flophouse and Grill began to function. The boys could sit in front of
their door and look down across the track and across the lot and across
the street right into the front windows of Western Biological. They
could hear the music from the laboratory at night. And their eyes
followed Doc across the street when he went to Lee Chong’s for beer. And
Mack said, “That Doc is a fine fellow. We ought to do something for
him.”


                               CHAPTER 2

THE WORD is a symbol and a delight which sucks up men and scenes, trees,
plants, factories, and Pekinese. Then the Thing becomes the Word and
back to Thing again, but warped and woven into a fantastic pattern. The
Word sucks up Cannery Row, digests it and spews it out, and the Row has
taken the shimmer of the green world and the sky-reflecting seas. Lee
Chong is more than a Chinese grocer. He must be. Perhaps he is evil
balanced and held suspended by good—an Asiatic planet held to its orbit
by the pull of Lao Tze and held away from Lao Tze by the centrifugality
of abacus and cash register—Lee Chong suspended, spinning, whirling
among groceries and ghosts. A hard man with a can of beans—a soft man
with the bones of his grandfather. For Lee Chong dug into the grave on
China Point and found the yellow bones, the skull with gray ropy hair
still sticking to it. And Lee carefully packed the bones, femurs, and
tibias really straight, skull in the middle, with pelvis and clavicle
surrounding it and ribs curving on either side. Then Lee Chong sent his
boxed and brittle grandfather over the western sea to lie at last in
ground made holy by his ancestors.

Mack and the boys, too, spinning in their orbits. They are the Virtues,
the Graces, the Beauties of the hurried mangled craziness of Monterey
and the cosmic Monterey where men in fear and hunger destroy their
stomachs in the fight to secure certain food, where men hungering for
love destroy everything lovable about them. Mack and the boys are the
Beauties, the Virtues, the Graces. In the world ruled by tigers with
ulcers, rutted by strictured bulls, scavenged by blind jackals, Mack and
the boys dine delicately with the tigers, fondle the frantic heifers,
and wrap up the crumbs to feed the sea gulls of Cannery Row. What can it
profit a man to gain the whole world and to come to his property with a
gastric ulcer, a blown prostate, and bifocals? Mack and the boys avoid
the trap, walk around the poison, step over the noose while a generation
of trapped, poisoned, and trussed-up men scream at them and call them
no-goods, come-to-bad-ends, blots-on-the-town, thieves, rascals, bums.
Our Father who art in nature, who has given the gift of survival to the
coyote, the common brown rat, the English sparrow, the house fly and the
moth, must have a great and overwhelming love for no-goods and
blots-on-the-town and bums, and Mack and the boys. Virtues and graces
and laziness and zest. Our Father who art in nature.


                               CHAPTER 3

LEE CHONG’S is to the right of the vacant lot (although why it is called
vacant when it is piled high with old boilers, with rusting pipes, with
great square timbers, and stacks of five-gallon cans, no one can say).
Up in back of the vacant lot is the railroad track and the Palace
Flophouse. But on the left-hand boundary of the lot is the stern and
stately whore house of Dora Flood; a decent, clean, honest,
old-fashioned sporting house where a man can take a glass of beer among
friends. This is no fly-by-night cheap clip-joint but a sturdy, virtuous
club, built, maintained, and disciplined by Dora who, madam and girl for
fifty years, has through the exercise of special gifts of tact and
honesty, charity and a certain realism, made herself respected by the
intelligent, the learned, and the kind. And by the same token she is
hated by the twisted and lascivious sisterhood of married spinsters
whose husbands respect the home but don’t like it very much.

Dora is a great woman, a great big woman with flaming orange hair and a
taste for Nile green evening dresses. She keeps an honest, one price
house, sells no hard liquor, and permits no loud or vulgar talk in her
house. Of her girls some are fairly inactive due to age and infirmities,
but Dora never puts them aside although, as she says, some of them don’t
turn three tricks a month but they go right on eating three meals a day.
In a moment of local love Dora named her place the Bear Flag Restaurant
and the stories are many of people who have gone in for a sandwich.
There are normally twelve girls in the house, counting the old ones, a
Greek cook, and a man who is known as a watchman but who undertakes all
manner of delicate and dangerous tasks. He stops fights, ejects drunks,
soothes hysteria, cures headaches, and tends bar. He bandages cuts and
bruises, passes the time of day with cops, and since a good half of the
girls are Christian Scientists, reads aloud his share of _Science and
Health_ on a Sunday morning. His predecessor, being a less well-balanced
man, came to an evil end as shall be reported, but Alfred has triumphed
over his environment and has brought his environment up with him. He
knows what men should be there and what men shouldn’t be there. He knows
more about the home life of Monterey citizens than anyone in town.

As for Dora—she leads a ticklish existence. Being against the law, at
least against its letter, she must be twice as law abiding as anyone
else. There must be no drunks, no fighting, no vulgarity, or they close
Dora up. Also being illegal Dora must be especially philanthropic.
Everyone puts the bite on her. If the police give a dance for their
pension fund and everyone else gives a dollar, Dora has to give fifty
dollars. When the Chamber of Commerce improved its gardens, the
merchants each gave five dollars but Dora was asked for and gave a
hundred. With everything else it is the same, Red Cross, Community
Chest, Boy Scouts, Dora’s unsung, unpublicized, shameless dirty wages of
sin lead the list of donations. But during the depression she was
hardest hit. In addition to the usual charities, Dora saw the hungry
children of Cannery Row and the jobless fathers and the worried women
and Dora paid grocery bills right and left for two years and very nearly
went broke in the process. Dora’s girls are well trained and pleasant.
They never speak to a man on the street although he may have been in the
night before.

Before Alfy the present watchman took over, there was a tragedy in the
Bear Flag Restaurant which saddened everyone. The previous watchman was
named William and he was a dark and lonesome-looking man. In the daytime
when his duties were few he would grow tired of female company. Through
the windows he could see Mack and the boys sitting on the pipes in the
vacant lot, dangling their feet in the mallow weeds and taking the sun
while they discoursed slowly and philosophically of matters of interest
but of no importance. Now and then as he watched them he saw them take
out a pint of Old Tennis Shoes and wiping the neck of the bottle on a
sleeve, raise the pint one after another. And William began to wish he
could join that good group. He walked out one day and sat on the pipe.
Conversation stopped and an uneasy and hostile silence fell on the
group. After a while William went disconsolately back to the Bear Flag
and through the window he saw the conversation spring up again and it
saddened him. He had a dark and ugly face and a mouth twisted with
brooding.

The next day he went again and this time he took a pint of whiskey. Mack
and the boys drank the whiskey, after all they weren’t crazy, but all
the talking they did was “Good luck,” and “Lookin’ at you.”

After a while William went back to the Bear Flag and he watched them
through the window and he heard Mack raise his voice saying, “But God
damn it, I hate a pimp!” Now this was obviously untrue although William
didn’t know that. Mack and the boys just didn’t like William.

Now William’s heart broke. The bums would not receive him socially. They
felt that he was too far beneath them. William had always been
introspective and self-accusing. He put on his hat and walked out along
the sea, clear out to the Lighthouse. And he stood in the pretty little
cemetery where you can hear the waves drumming always. William thought
dark and broody thoughts. No one loved him. No one cared about him. They
might call him a watchman but he was a pimp—a dirty pimp, the lowest
thing in the world. And then he thought how he had a right to live and
be happy just like anyone else, by God he had. He walked back angrily
but his anger went away when he came to the Bear Flag and climbed the
steps. It was evening and the juke box was playing _Harvest Moon_ and
William remembered that the first hooker who ever gaffed for him used to
like that song before she ran away and got married and disappeared. The
song made him awfully sad. Dora was in the back parlor having a cup of
tea when William came in. She said, “What’s the matter, you sick?”

“No,” said William. “But what’s the percentage? I feel lousy. I think
I’ll bump myself off.”

Dora had handled plenty of neurotics in her time. Kid ’em out of it was
her motto. “Well, do it on your own time and don’t mess up the rugs,”
she said.

A gray damp cloud folded over William’s heart and he walked slowly out
and down the hall and knocked on Eva Flanegan’s door. She had red hair
and went to confession every week. Eva was quite a spiritual girl with a
big family of brothers and sisters but she was an unpredictable drunk.
She was painting her nails and messing them pretty badly when William
went in and he knew she was bagged and Dora wouldn’t let a bagged girl
work. Her fingers were nail polish to the first joint and she was angry.
“What’s eating you?” she said. William grew angry too. “I’m going to
bump myself off,” he said fiercely.

Eva screeched at him. “That’s a dirty, lousy, stinking sin,” she cried,
and then, “Wouldn’t it be like you to get the joint pinched just when I
got almost enough kick to take a trip to East St. Louis. You’re a
no-good bastard.” She was still screaming at him when William shut her
door after him and went to the kitchen. He was very tired of women. The
Greek would be restful after women.

The Greek, big apron, sleeves rolled up, was frying pork chops in two
big skillets, turning them over with an ice pick. “Hello, Kits. How is
going things?” The pork chops hissed and swished in the pan.

“I don’t know, Lou,” said William. “Sometimes I think the best thing to
do would be—kluck!” He drew his finger across his throat.

The Greek laid the ice pick on the stove and rolled his sleeves higher.
“I tell you what I hear, Kits,” he said. “I hear like the fella talks
about it don’t never do it.” William’s hand went out for the ice pick
and he held it easily in his hand. His eyes looked deeply into the
Greek’s dark eyes and he saw disbelief and amusement and then as he
stared the Greek’s eyes grew troubled and then worried. And William saw
the change, saw first how the Greek knew he could do it and then the
Greek knew he would do it. As soon as he saw that in the Greek’s eyes
William knew he had to do it. He was sad because now it seemed silly.
His hand rose and the ice pick snapped into his heart. It was amazing
how easily it went in. William was the watchman before Alfred came.
Everyone liked Alfred. He could sit on the pipes with Mack and the boys
any time. He could even visit up at the Palace Flophouse.


                               CHAPTER 4

IN THE evening just at dusk, a curious thing happened on Cannery Row. It
happened in the time between sunset and the lighting of the street
light. There is a small quiet gray period then. Down the hill, past the
Palace Flophouse, down the chicken walk and through the vacant lot came
an old Chinaman. He wore an ancient flat straw hat, blue jeans, both
coat and trousers, and heavy shoes of which one sole was loose so that
it slapped the ground when he walked. In his hand he carried a covered
wicker basket. His face was lean and brown and corded as jerky and his
old eyes were brown, even the whites were brown and deep set so that
they looked out of holes. He came by just at dusk and crossed the street
and went through the opening between Western Biological and the Hediondo
Cannery. Then he crossed the little beach and disappeared among the
piles and steel posts which support the piers. No one saw him again
until dawn.

But in the dawn, during that time when the street light has been turned
off and the daylight has not come, the old Chinaman crept out from among
the piles, crossed the beach and the street. His wicker basket was heavy
and wet and dripping now. His loose sole flap-flapped on the street. He
went up the hill to the second street, went through a gate in a high
board fence and was not seen again until evening. People, sleeping,
heard his flapping shoe go by and they awakened for a moment. It had
been happening for years but no one ever got used to him. Some people
thought he was God and very old people thought he was Death and children
thought he was a very funny old Chinaman, as children always think
anything old and strange is funny. But the children did not taunt him or
shout at him as they should for he carried a little cloud of fear about
with him.

Only one brave and beautiful boy of ten named Andy from Salinas ever
crossed the old Chinaman. Andy was visiting in Monterey and he saw the
old man and knew he must shout at him if only to keep his self-respect,
but even Andy, brave as he was, felt the little cloud of fear. Andy
watched him go by evening after evening while his duty and his terror
wrestled. And then one evening Andy braced himself and marched behind
the old man singing in a shrill falsetto, “Ching-Chong Chinaman sitting
on a rail—’Long came a white man an’ chopped off his tail.”

The old man stopped and turned. Andy stopped. The deep-brown eyes looked
at Andy and the thin corded lips moved. What happened then Andy was
never able either to explain or to forget. For the eyes spread out until
there was no Chinaman. And then it was one eye—one huge brown eye as
big as a church door. Andy looked through the shiny transparent brown
door and through it he saw a lonely countryside, flat for miles but
ending against a row of fantastic mountains shaped like cows’ and dogs’
heads and tents and mushrooms. There was low coarse grass on the plain
and here and there a little mound. And a small animal like a woodchuck
sat on each mound. And the loneliness—the desolate cold aloneness of
the landscape made Andy whimper because there wasn’t anybody at all in
the world and he was left. Andy shut his eyes so he wouldn’t have to see
it any more and when he opened them, he was in Cannery Row and the old
Chinaman was just flap-flapping between Western Biological and the
Hediondo Cannery. Andy was the only boy who ever did that and he never
did it again.


                               CHAPTER 5

WESTERN BIOLOGICAL was right across the street and facing the vacant
lot. Lee Chong’s grocery was on its catty-corner right and Dora’s Bear
Flag Restaurant was on its catty-corner left. Western Biological deals
in strange and beautiful wares. It sells the lovely animals of the sea,
the sponges, tunicates, anemones, the stars and buttlestars, and sun
stars, the bivalves, barnacles, the worms and shells, the fabulous and
multiform little brothers, the living moving flowers of the sea,
nudibranchs and tectibranchs, the spiked and nobbed and needly urchins,
the crabs and demi-crabs, the little dragons, the snapping shrimps, and
ghost shrimps so transparent that they hardly throw a shadow. And
Western Biological sells bugs and snails and spiders, and rattlesnakes,
and rats, and honey bees and Gila monsters. These are all for sale. Then
there are little unborn humans, some whole and others sliced thin and
mounted on slides. And for students there are sharks with the blood
drained out and yellow and blue color substituted in veins and arteries,
so that you may follow the systems with a scalpel. And there are cats
with colored veins and arteries, and frogs the same. You can order
anything living from Western Biological and sooner or later you will get
it.

It is a low building facing the street. The basement is the storeroom
with shelves, shelves clear to the ceiling loaded with jars of preserved
animals. And in the basement is a sink and instruments for embalming and
for injecting. Then you go through the backyard to a covered shed on
piles over the ocean and here are the tanks for the larger animals, the
sharks and rays and octopi, each in their concrete tanks. There is a
stairway up the front of the building and a door that opens into an
office where there is a desk piled high with unopened mail, filing
cabinets, and a safe with the door propped open. Once the safe got
locked by mistake and no one knew the combination. And in the safe was
an open can of sardines and a piece of Roquefort cheese. Before the
combination could be sent by the maker of the lock, there was trouble in
the safe. It was then that Doc devised a method for getting revenge on a
bank if anyone should ever want to. “Rent a safety deposit box,” he
said, “then deposit in it one whole fresh salmon and go away for six
months.” After the trouble with the safe, it was not permitted to keep
food there any more. It is kept in the filing cabinets. Behind the
office is a room where in aquaria are many living animals; there also
are the microscopes and the slides and the drug cabinets, the cases of
laboratory glass, the work benches and little motors, the chemicals.
From this room come smells—formaline, and dry starfish, and sea water
and menthol, carbolic acid and acetic acid, smell of brown wrapping
paper and straw and rope, smell of chloroform and ether, smell of ozone
from the motors, smell of fine steel and thin lubricant from the
microscopes, smell of banana oil and rubber tubing, smell of drying wool
socks and boots, sharp pungent smell of rattlesnakes, and musty
frightening smell of rats. And through the back door comes the smell of
kelp and barnacles when the tide is out and the smell of salt and spray
when the tide is in.

To the left the office opens into a library. The walls are bookcases to
the ceiling, boxes of pamphlets and separates, books of all kinds,
dictionaries, encyclopedias, poetry, plays. A great phonograph stands
against the wall with hundreds of records lined up beside it. Under the
window is a redwood bed and on the walls and to the bookcases are pinned
reproductions of Daumiers, and Graham, Titian, and Leonardo and Picasso,
Dali and George Grosz, pinned here and there at eye level so that you
can look at them if you want to. There are chairs and benches in this
little room and of course the bed. As many as forty people have been
here at one time.

Behind this library or music room, or whatever you want to call it, is
the kitchen, a narrow chamber with a gas stove, a water heater, and a
sink. But whereas some food is kept in the filing cabinets in the
office, dishes and cooking fat and vegetables are kept in glass-fronted
sectional bookcases in the kitchen. No whimsy dictated this. It just
happened. From the ceiling of the kitchen hang pieces of bacon, and
salami, and black bêche-de-mer. Behind the kitchen is a toilet and a
shower. The toilet leaked for five years until a clever and handsome
guest fixed it with a piece of chewing gum.

Doc is the owner and operator of the Western Biological Laboratory. Doc
is rather small, deceptively small, for he is wiry and very strong and
when passionate anger comes on him he can be very fierce. He wears a
beard and his face is half Christ and half satyr and his face tells the
truth. It is said that he has helped many a girl out of one trouble and
into another. Doc has the hands of a brain surgeon, and a cool warm
mind. Doc tips his hat to dogs as he drives by and the dogs look up and
smile at him. He can kill anything for need but he could not even hurt a
feeling for pleasure. He has one great fear—that of getting his head
wet, so that summer or winter he ordinarily wears a rain hat. He will
wade in a tide pool up to the chest without feeling damp, but a drop of
rain water on his head makes him panicky.

Over a period of years Doc dug himself into Cannery Row to an extent not
even he suspected. He became the fountain of philosophy and science and
art. In the laboratory the girls from Dora’s heard the Plain Songs and
Gregorian music for the first time. Lee Chong listened while Li Po was
read to him in English. Henri the painter heard for the first time the
Book of the Dead and was so moved that he changed his medium. Henri had
been painting with glue, iron rust, and colored chicken feathers but he
changed and his next four paintings were done entirely with different
kinds of nutshells. Doc would listen to any kind of nonsense and change
it for you to a kind of wisdom. His mind had no horizon—and his
sympathy had no warp. He could talk to children, telling them very
profound things so that they understood. He lived in a world of wonders,
of excitement. He was concupiscent as a rabbit and gentle as hell.
Everyone who knew him was indebted to him. And everyone who thought of
him thought next, “I really must do something nice for Doc.”


                               CHAPTER 6

DOC was collecting marine animals in the Great Tide Pool on the tip of
the Peninsula. It is a fabulous place: when the tide is in, a
wave-churned basin, creamy with foam, whipped by the combers that roll
in from the whistling buoy on the reef. But when the tide goes out the
little water world becomes quiet and lovely. The sea is very clear and
the bottom becomes fantastic with hurrying, fighting, feeding, breeding
animals. Crabs rush from frond to frond of the waving algae. Starfish
squat over mussels and limpets, attach their million little suckers and
then slowly lift with incredible power until the prey is broken from the
rock. And then the starfish stomach comes out and envelops its food.
Orange and speckled and fluted nudibranchs slide gracefully over the
rocks, their skirts waving like the dresses of Spanish dancers. And
black eels poke their heads out of crevices and wait for prey. The
snapping shrimps with their trigger claws pop loudly. The lovely,
colored world is glassed over. Hermit crabs like frantic children
scamper on the bottom sand. And now one, finding an empty snail shell he
likes better than his own, creeps out, exposing his soft body to the
enemy for a moment, and then pops into the new shell. A wave breaks over
the barrier, and churns the glassy water for a moment and mixes bubbles
into the pool, and then it clears and is tranquil and lovely and
murderous again. Here a crab tears a leg from his brother. The anemones
expand like soft and brilliant flowers, inviting any tired and perplexed
animal to lie for a moment in their arms, and when some small crab or
little tide-pool Johnnie accepts the green and purple invitation, the
petals whip in, the stinging cells shoot tiny narcotic needles into the
prey and it grows weak and perhaps sleepy while the searing caustic
digestive acids melt its body down.

Then the creeping murderer, the octopus, steals out, slowly, softly,
moving like a gray mist, pretending now to be a bit of weed, now a rock,
now a lump of decaying meat while its evil goat eyes watch coldly. It
oozes and flows toward a feeding crab, and as it comes close its yellow
eyes burn and its body turns rosy with the pulsing color of anticipation
and rage. Then suddenly it runs lightly on the tips of its arms, as
ferociously as a charging cat. It leaps savagely on the crab, there is a
puff of black fluid, and the struggling mass is obscured in the sepia
cloud while the octopus murders the crab. On the exposed rocks out of
water, the barnacles bubble behind their closed doors and the limpets
dry out. And down to the rocks come the black flies to eat anything they
can find. The sharp smell of iodine from the algae, and the lime smell
of calcareous bodies and the smell of powerful protean, smell of sperm
and ova fill the air. On the exposed rocks the starfish emit semen and
eggs from between their rays. The smells of life and richness, of death
and digestion, of decay and birth, burden the air. And salt spray blows
in from the barrier where the ocean waits for its rising-tide strength
to permit it back into the Great Tide Pool again. And on the reef the
whistling buoy bellows like a sad and patient bull.

In the pool Doc and Hazel worked together. Hazel lived in the Palace
Flophouse with Mack and the boys. Hazel got his name in as haphazard a
way as his life was ever afterward. His worried mother had had seven
children in eight years. Hazel was the eighth, and his mother became
confused about his sex when he was born. She was tired and run down
anyway from trying to feed and clothe seven children and their father.
She had tried every possible way of making money—paper flowers,
mushrooms at home, rabbits for meat and fur—while her husband from a
canvas chair gave her every help his advice and reasoning and criticism
could offer. She had a great aunt named Hazel who was reputed to carry
life insurance. The eighth child was named Hazel before the mother got
it through her head that Hazel was a boy and by that time she was used
to the name and never bothered to change it. Hazel grew up—did four
years in grammar school, four years in reform school, and didn’t learn
anything in either place. Reform schools are supposed to teach
viciousness and criminality but Hazel didn’t pay enough attention. He
came out of reform school as innocent of viciousness as he was of
fractions and long division. Hazel loved to hear conversation but he
didn’t listen to words—just to the tone of conversation. He asked
questions, not to hear the answers but simply to continue the flow. He
was twenty-six—dark-haired and pleasant, strong, willing, and loyal.
Quite often he went collecting with Doc and he was very good at it once
he knew what was wanted. His fingers could creep like an octopus, could
grab and hold like an anemone. He was sure-footed on the slippery rocks
and he loved the hunt. Doc wore his rain hat and high rubber boots as he
worked but Hazel sloshed about in tennis shoes and blue jeans. They were
collecting starfish. Doc had an order for three hundred.

Hazel picked a nobby purplish starfish from the bottom of the pool and
popped it into his nearly full gunny sack. “I wonder what they do with
them,” he said.

“Do with what?” Doc asked.

“The starfish,” said Hazel. “You sell ’em. You’ll send out a barrel of
’em. What do the guys do with ’em? You can’t eat ’em.”

“They study them,” said Doc patiently and he remembered that he had
answered this question for Hazel dozens of times before. But Doc had one
mental habit he could not get over. When anyone asked a question, Doc
thought he wanted to know the answer. That was the way with Doc. _He_
never asked unless he wanted to know and he could not conceive of the
brain that would ask without wanting to know. But Hazel, who simply
wanted to hear talk, had developed a system of making the answer to one
question the basis of another. It kept conversation going.

“What do they find to study?” Hazel continued. “They’re just starfish.
There’s millions of ’em around. I could get you a million of ’em.”

“They’re complicated and interesting animals,” Doc said a little
defensively. “Besides, these are going to the Middle West to
Northwestern University.”

Hazel used his trick. “They got no starfish there?”

“They got no ocean there,” said Doc.

“Oh!” said Hazel and he cast frantically about for a peg to hang a new
question on. He hated to have a conversation die out like this. He
wasn’t quick enough. While he was looking for a question Doc asked one.
Hazel hated that, it meant casting about in his mind for an answer and
casting about in Hazel’s mind was like wandering alone in a deserted
museum. Hazel’s mind was choked with uncatalogued exhibits. He never
forgot anything but he never bothered to arrange his memories.
Everything was thrown together like fishing tackle in the bottom of a
rowboat, hooks and sinkers and line and lures and gaffs all snarled up.

Doc asked, “How are things going up at the Palace?”

Hazel ran his fingers through his dark hair and he peered into the
clutter of his mind. “Pretty good,” he said. “That fellow Gay is moving
in with us I guess. His wife hits him pretty bad. He don’t mind that
when he’s awake but she waits ’til he gets to sleep and then hits him.
He hates that. He has to wake up and beat her up and then when he goes
back to sleep she hits him again. He don’t get any rest so he’s moving
in with us.”

“That’s a new one,” said Doc. “She used to swear out a warrant and put
him in jail.”

“Yeah!” said Hazel. “But that was before they built the new jail in
Salinas. Used to be thirty days and Gay was pretty hot to get out, but
this new jail—radio in the tank and good bunks and the sheriff’s a nice
fellow. Gay gets in there and he don’t want to come out. He likes it so
much his wife won’t get him arrested any more. So she figured out this
hitting him while he’s asleep. It’s nerve racking, he says. And you know
as good as me—Gay never did take any pleasure beating her up. He only
done it to keep his self-respect. But he gets tired of it. I guess he’ll
be with us now.”

Doc straightened up. The waves were beginning to break over the barrier
of the Great Tide Pool. The tide was coming in and little rivers from
the sea had begun to flow over the rocks. The wind blew freshly in from
the whistling buoy and the barking of sea lions came from around the
point. Doc pushed his rain hat on the back of his head. “We’ve got
enough starfish,” he said and then went on, “Look, Hazel, I know you’ve
got six or seven undersized abalones in the bottom of your sack. If we
get stopped by a game warden, you’re going to say they’re mine, on my
permit—aren’t you?”

“Well—hell,” said Hazel.

“Look,” Doc said kindly. “Suppose I get an order for abalones and maybe
the game warden thinks I’m using my collecting permit too often. Suppose
he thinks I’m eating them.”

“Well—hell,” said Hazel.

“It’s like the industrial alcohol board. They’ve got suspicious minds.
They always think I’m drinking the alcohol. They think that about
everyone.”

“Well, ain’t you?”

“Not much of it,” said Doc. “That stuff they put in it tastes terrible
and it’s a big job to redistill it.”

“That stuff ain’t so bad,” said Hazel. “Me and Mack had a snort of it
the other day. What is it they put in?”

Doc was about to answer when he saw it was Hazel’s trick again. “Let’s
get moving,” he said. He hoisted his sack of starfish on his shoulder.
And he had forgotten the illegal abalones in the bottom of Hazel’s sack.

Hazel followed him up out of the tide pool and up the slippery trail to
solid ground. The little crabs scampered and skittered out of their way.
Hazel felt that he had better cement the grave over the topic of the
abalones.

“That painter guy came back to the Palace,” he offered.

“Yes?” said Doc.

“Yeah! You see, he done all our pictures in chicken feathers and now he
says he got to do them all over again with nutshells. He says he changed
his—his med—medium.”

Doc chuckled. “He still building his boat?”

“Sure,” said Hazel. “He’s got it all changed around. New kind of a boat.
I guess he’ll take it apart and change it. Doc—is he nuts?”

Doc swung his heavy sack of starfish to the ground and stood panting a
little. “Nuts?” he asked. “Oh, yes, I guess so. Nuts about the same
amount we are, only in a different way.”

Such a thing had never occurred to Hazel. He looked upon himself as a
crystal pool of clarity and on his life as a troubled glass of
misunderstood virtue. Doc’s last statement had outraged him a little.
“But that boat—” he cried. “He’s been building that boat for seven
years that I know of. The blocks rotted out and he made concrete blocks.
Every time he gets it nearly finished he changes it and starts over
again. I think he’s nuts. Seven years on a boat.”

Doc was sitting on the ground pulling off his rubber boots. “You don’t
understand,” he said gently. “Henri loves boats but he’s afraid of the
ocean.”

“What’s he want a boat for then?” Hazel demanded.

“He likes boats,” said Doc. “But suppose he finishes his boat. Once it’s
finished people will say, ‘Why don’t you put it in the water?’ Then if
he puts it in the water, he’ll have to go out in it, and he hates the
water. So you see, he never finishes the boat—so he doesn’t ever have
to launch it.”

Hazel had followed this reasoning to a certain point but he abandoned it
before it was resolved, not only abandoned it but searched for some way
to change the subject. “I think he’s nuts,” he said lamely.

On the black earth on which the ice plants bloomed, hundreds of black
stink bugs crawled. And many of them stuck their tails up in the air.
“Look at all them stink bugs,” Hazel remarked, grateful to the bugs for
being there.

“They’re interesting,” said Doc.

“Well, what they got their asses up in the air for?”

Doc rolled up his wool socks and put them in the rubber boots and from
his pocket he brought out dry socks and a pair of thin moccasins. “I
don’t know why,” he said. “I looked them up recently—they’re very
common animals and one of the commonest things they do is put their
tails up in the air. And in all the books there isn’t one mention of the
fact that they put their tails up in the air or why.”

Hazel turned one of the stink bugs over with the toe of his wet tennis
shoe and the shining black beetle strove madly with floundering legs to
get upright again. “Well, why do _you_ think they do it?”

“I think they’re praying,” said Doc.

“What!” Hazel was shocked.

“The remarkable thing,” said Doc, “isn’t that they put their tails up in
the air—the really incredibly remarkable thing is that we find it
remarkable. We can only use ourselves as yardsticks. If we did something
as inexplicable and strange we’d probably be praying—so maybe they’re
praying.”

“Let’s get the hell out of here,” said Hazel.


                               CHAPTER 7

THE PALACE Flophouse was no sudden development. Indeed when Mack and
Hazel and Eddie and Hughie and Jones moved into it, they looked upon it
as little more than shelter from the wind and the rain, as a place to go
when everything else had closed or when their welcome was thin and sere
with overuse. Then the Palace was only a long bare room, lit dimly by
two small windows, walled with unpainted wood smelling strongly of fish
meal. They had not loved it then. But Mack knew that some kind of
organization was necessary particularly among such a group of ravening
individualists.

A training army which has not been equipped with guns and artillery and
tanks uses artificial guns and masquerading trucks to simulate its
destructive panoply—and its toughening soldiers get used to field guns
by handling logs on wheels.

Mack, with a piece of chalk, drew five oblongs on the floor, each seven
feet long and four feet wide, and in each square he wrote a name. These
were the simulated beds. Each man had property rights inviolable in his
space. He could legally fight a man who encroached on his square. The
rest of the room was property common to all. That was in the first days
when Mack and the boys sat on the floor, played cards hunkered down, and
slept on the hard boards. Perhaps, save for an accident of weather, they
might always have lived that way. However, an unprecedented rainfall
which went on for over a month changed all that. House-ridden, the boys
grew tired of squatting on the floor. Their eyes became outraged by the
bare board walls. Because it sheltered them the house grew dear to them.
And it had the charm of never knowing the entrance of an outraged
landlord. For Lee Chong never came near it. Then one afternoon Hughie
came in with an army cot which had a torn canvas. He spent two hours
sewing up the rip with fishing line. And that night the others lying on
the floor in their squares watched Hughie ooze gracefully into his
cot—they heard him sigh with abysmal comfort and he was asleep and
snoring before anyone else.

The next day Mack puffed up the hill carrying a rusty set of springs he
had found on a scrap-iron dump. The apathy was broken then. The boys
outdid one another in beautifying the Palace Flophouse until after a few
months it was, if anything, overfurnished. There were old carpets on the
floor, chairs with and without seats. Mack had a wicker chaise longue
painted bright red. There were tables, a grandfather clock without dial
face or works. The walls were whitewashed which made it almost light and
airy. Pictures began to appear—mostly calendars showing improbable
luscious blondes holding bottles of Coca-Cola. Henri had contributed two
pieces from his chicken-feather period. A bundle of gilded cattails
stood in one corner and a sheaf of peacock feathers was nailed to the
wall beside the grandfather clock.

They were some time acquiring a stove and when they did find what they
wanted, a silver-scrolled monster with floriated warming ovens and a
front like a nickel-plated tulip garden, they had trouble getting it. It
was too big to steal and its owner refused to part with it to the sick
widow with eight children whom Mack invented and patronized in the same
moment. The owner wanted a dollar and a half and didn’t come down to
eighty cents for three days. The boys closed at eighty cents and gave
him an I.O.U. which he probably still has. This transaction took place
in Seaside and the stove weighed three hundred pounds. Mack and Hughie
exhausted every possibility of haulage for ten days and only when they
realized that no one was going to take this stove home for them did they
begin to carry it. It took them three days to carry it to Cannery Row, a
distance of five miles, and they camped beside it at night. But once
installed in the Palace Flophouse it was the glory and the hearth and
the center. Its nickel flowers and foliage shone with a cheery light. It
was the gold tooth of the Palace. Fired up, it warmed the big room. Its
oven was wonderful and you could fry an egg on its shiny black lids.

With the great stove came pride, and with pride, the Palace became home.
Eddie planted morning glories to run over the door and Hazel acquired
some rather rare fuchsia bushes planted in five-gallon cans which made
the entrance formal and a little cluttered. Mack and the boys loved the
Palace and they even cleaned it a little sometimes. In their minds they
sneered at unsettled people who had no house to go to and occasionally
in their pride they brought a guest home for a day or two.

Eddie was understudy bartender at La Ida. He filled in when Whitey the
regular bartender was sick, which was as often as Whitey could get away
with it. Every time Eddie filled in, a few bottles disappeared, so he
couldn’t fill in too often. But Whitey liked to have Eddie take his
place because he was convinced, and correctly, that Eddie was one man
who wouldn’t try to keep his job permanently. Almost anyone could have
trusted Eddie to this extent. Eddie didn’t have to remove much liquor.
He kept a gallon jug under the bar and in the mouth of the jug there was
a funnel. Anything left in the glasses Eddie poured into the funnel
before he washed the glasses. If an argument or a song were going on at
La Ida, or late at night when good fellowship had reached its logical
conclusion, Eddie poured glasses half or two-thirds full into the
funnel. The resulting punch which he took back to the Palace was always
interesting and sometimes surprising. The mixture of rye, beer, bourbon,
scotch, wine, rum, and gin was fairly constant, but now and then some
effete customer would order a stinger or an anisette or a curaçao and
these little touches gave a distinct character to the punch. It was
Eddie’s habit always to shake a little angostura into the jug just
before he left. On a good night Eddie got three-quarters of a gallon. It
was a source of satisfaction to him that nobody was out anything. He had
observed that a man got just as drunk on half a glass as on a whole one,
that is, if he was in the mood to get drunk at all.

Eddie was a very desirable inhabitant of the Palace Flophouse. The
others never asked him to help with the house-cleaning and once Hazel
washed four pairs of Eddie’s socks.

Now on the afternoon when Hazel was out collecting with Doc in the Great
Tide Pool, the boys were sitting around in the Palace sipping the result
of Eddie’s latest contribution. Gay was there too, the latest member of
the group. Eddie sipped speculatively from his glass and smacked his
lips. “It’s funny how you get a run,” he said. “Take last night. There
was at least ten guys ordered Manhattans. Sometimes maybe you don’t get
two calls for a Manhattan in a month. It’s the grenadine gives the stuff
that taste.”

Mack tasted his—a big taste—and refilled his glass. “Yes,” he said
somberly, “it’s little things make the difference.” He looked about to
see how this gem had set with the others.

Only Gay got the full impact. “Sure is,” he said. “Does—”

“Where’s Hazel today?” Mack asked.

Jones said, “Hazel went out with Doc to get some starfish.”

Mack nodded his head soberly. “That Doc is a hell of a nice fella,” he
said. “He’ll give you a quarter any time. When I cut myself he put on a
new bandage every day. A hell of a nice fella.”

The others nodded in profound agreement.

“I been wondering for a long time,” Mack continued, “what we could do
for him—something nice. Something he’d like.”

“He’d like a dame,” said Hughie.

“He’s got three four dames,” said Jones. “You can always tell—when he
pulls them front curtains closed and when he plays that kind of church
music on the phonograph.”

Mack said reprovingly to Hughie, “Just because he doesn’t run no dame
naked through the streets in the daytime, you think Doc’s celebrate.”

“What’s celebrate?” Eddie asked.

“That’s when you can’t get no dame,” said Mack.

“I thought it was a kind of a party,” said Jones.

A silence fell on the room. Mack shifted in his chaise longue. Hughie
let the front legs of his chair down on the floor. They looked into
space and then they all looked at Mack. Mack said, “Hum!”

Eddie said, “What kind of a party you think Doc’d like?”

“What other kind is there?” said Jones.

Mack mused, “Doc wouldn’t like this stuff from the winin’ jug.”

“How do you know?” Hughie demanded. “You never offered him none.”

“Oh, I know,” said Mack. “He’s been to college. Once I seen a dame in a
fur coat go in there. Never did see her come out. It was two o’clock the
last I looked—and that church music goin’. No—you couldn’t offer him
none of this.” He filled his glass again.

“This tastes pretty nice after the third glass,” Hughie said loyally.

“No,” said Mack. “Not for Doc. Have to be whiskey—the real thing.”

“He likes beer,” said Jones. “He’s all the time going over to Lee’s for
beer—sometimes in the middle of the night.”

Mack said, “I figure when you buy beer, you’re buying too much tare.
Take 8 percent beer—why you’re spending your dough for 92 percent water
and color and hops and stuff like that. Eddie,” he added, “you think you
could get four five bottles of whiskey at La Ida next time Whitey’s
sick?”

“Sure,” said Eddie. “Sure I could get it but that’d be the end—no more
golden eggs. I think Johnnie’s suspicious anyways. Other day he says, ‘I
smell a mouse named Eddie.’ I was gonna lay low and only bring the jug
for a while.”

“Yeah!” said Jones. “Don’t you lose that job. If something happened to
Whitey, you could fall right in there for a week or so ’til they got
somebody else. I guess if we’re goin’ to give a party for Doc, we got to
buy the whiskey. How much is whiskey a gallon?”

“I don’t know,” said Hughie. “I never get more than a half pint at a
time myself—at one time that is. I figure you get a quart and right
away you got friends. But you get a half pint and you can drink it in
the lot before—well before you got a lot of folks around.”

“It’s going to take dough to give Doc a party,” said Mack. “If we’re
going to give him a party at all it ought to be a good one. Should have
a big cake. I wonder when is his birthday?”

“Don’t need a birthday for a party,” said Jones.

“No—but it’s nice,” said Mack. “I figure it would take ten or twelve
bucks to give Doc a party you wouldn’t be ashamed of.”

They looked at one another speculatively. Hughie suggested, “The
Hediondo Cannery is hiring guys.”

“No,” said Mack quickly. “We got good reputations and we don’t want to
spoil them. Every one of us keeps a job for a month or more when we take
one. That’s why we can always get a job when we need one. S’pose we take
a job for a day or so—why we’ll lose our reputation for sticking. Then
if we needed a job there wouldn’t nobody have us.” The rest nodded quick
agreement.

“I figure I’m gonna work a couple of months—November and part of
December,” said Jones. “Makes it nice to have money around Christmas. We
could cook a turkey this year.”

“By God, we could,” said Mack. “I know a place up Carmel Valley where
there’s fifteen hundred in one flock.”

“Valley,” said Hughie. “You know I used to collect stuff up the Valley
for Doc, turtles and crayfish and frogs. Got a nickel apiece for frogs.”

“Me, too,” said Gay. “I got five hundred frogs one time.”

“If Doc needs frogs it’s a setup,” said Mack. “We could go up the Carmel
River and have a little outing and we wouldn’t tell Doc what it was for
and then we’d give him one hell of a party.”

A quiet excitement grew in the Palace Flophouse. “Gay,” said Mack, “take
a look out the door and see if Doc’s car is in front of his place.”

Gay set down his glass and looked out. “Not yet,” he said.

“Well, he ought to be back any minute,” said Mack. “Now here’s how we’ll
go about it. . . .”


                               CHAPTER 8

IN APRIL 1932 the boiler at the Hediondo Cannery blew a tube for the
third time in two weeks and the board of directors consisting of Mr.
Randolph and a stenographer decided that it would be cheaper to buy a
new boiler than to have to shut down so often. In time the new boiler
arrived and the old one was moved into the vacant lot between Lee
Chong’s and the Bear Flag Restaurant where it was set on blocks to await
an inspiration on Mr. Randolph’s part on how to make some money out of
it. Gradually the plant engineer removed the tubing to use to patch
other outworn equipment at the Hediondo. The boiler looked like an
old-fashioned locomotive without wheels. It had a big door in the center
of its nose and a low fire door. Gradually it became red and soft with
rust and gradually the mallow weeds grew up around it and the flaking
rust fed the weeds. Flowering myrtle crept up its sides and the wild
anise perfumed the air about it. Then someone threw out a datura root
and the thick fleshy tree grew up and the great white bells hung down
over the boiler door and at night the flowers smelled of love and
excitement, an incredibly sweet and moving odor.

In 1935 Mr. and Mrs. Sam Malloy moved into the boiler. The tubing was
all gone now and it was a roomy, dry, and safe apartment. True, if you
came in through the fire door you had to get down on your hands and
knees, but once in there was head room in the middle and you couldn’t
want a dryer, warmer place to stay. They shagged a mattress through the
fire door and settled down. Mr. Malloy was happy and contented there and
for quite a long time so was Mrs. Malloy.

Below the boiler on the hill there were numbers of large pipes also
abandoned by the Hediondo. Toward the end of 1937 there was a great
catch of fish and the canneries were working full time and a housing
shortage occurred. Then it was that Mr. Malloy took to renting the
larger pipes as sleeping quarters for single men at a very nominal fee.
With a piece of tar paper over one end and a square of carpet over the
other, they made comfortable bedrooms, although men used to sleeping
curled up had to change their habits or move out. There were those too
who claimed that their snores echoing back from the pipes woke them up.
But on the whole Mr. Malloy did a steady small business and was happy.

Mrs. Malloy had been contented until her husband became a landlord and
then she began to change. First it was a rug, then a washtub, then a
lamp with a colored silk shade. Finally she came into the boiler on her
hands and knees one day and she stood up and said a little breathlessly,
“Holman’s are having a sale of curtains. Real lace curtains and edges of
blue and pink—$1.98 a set with curtain rods thrown in.”

Mr. Malloy sat up on the mattress. “Curtains?” he demanded. “What in
God’s name do you want curtains for?”

“I like things nice,” said Mrs. Malloy. “I always did like to have
things nice for you,” and her lower lip began to tremble.

“But, darling,” Sam Malloy cried, “I got nothing against curtains. I
like curtains.”

“Only $1.98,” Mrs. Malloy quavered, “and you begrutch me $1.98,” and she
sniffled and her chest heaved.

“I don’t begrutch you,” said Mr. Malloy. “But, darling—for Christ’s
sake what are we going to do with curtains? We got no windows.”

Mrs. Malloy cried and cried and Sam held her in his arms and comforted
her.

“Men just don’t understand how a woman feels,” she sobbed. “Men just
never try to put themselves in a woman’s place.”

And Sam lay beside her and rubbed her back for a long time before she
went to sleep.


                               CHAPTER 9

WHEN DOC’S car came back to the laboratory, Mack and the boys secretly
watched Hazel help to carry in the sacks of starfish. In a few minutes
Hazel came damply up the chicken walk to the Palace. His jeans were wet
with sea water to the thighs and where it was drying the white salt
rings were forming. He sat heavily in the patent rocker that was his and
shucked off his wet tennis shoes.

Mack asked, “How is Doc feeling?”

“Fine,” said Hazel. “You can’t understand a word he says. Know what he
said about stink bugs? No—I better not tell you.”

“He seem in a nice friendly mood?” Mack asked.

“Sure,” said Hazel. “We got two three hundred starfish. He’s all right.”

“I wonder if we better all go over?” Mack asked himself and he answered
himself, “No, I guess it would be better if one went alone. It might get
him mixed up if we all went.”

“What is this?” Hazel asked.

“We got plans,” said Mack. “I’ll go myself so as not to startle him. You
guys stay here and wait. I’ll come back in a few minutes.”

Mack went out and he teetered down the chicken walk and across the
track. Mr. Malloy was sitting on a brick in front of his boiler.

“How are you, Sam?” Mack asked.

“Pretty good.”

“How’s the missus?”

“Pretty good,” said Mr. Malloy. “You know any kind of glue that you can
stick cloth to iron?”

Ordinarily Mack would have thrown himself headlong into this problem but
now he was not to be deflected. “No,” he said.

He went across the vacant lot, crossed the street and entered the
basement of the laboratory.

Doc had his hat off now since there was practically no chance of getting
his head wet unless a pipe broke. He was busy removing the starfish from
the wet sacks and arranging them on the cool concrete floor. The
starfish were twisted and knotted up for a starfish loves to hang onto
something and for an hour these had found only each other. Doc arranged
them in long lines and very slowly they straightened out until they lay
in symmetrical stars on the concrete floor. Doc’s pointed brown beard
was damp with perspiration as he worked. He looked up a little nervously
as Mack entered. It was not that trouble always came in with Mack but
something always entered with him.

“Hiya, Doc?” said Mack.

“All right,” said Doc uneasily.

“Hear about Phyllis Mae over at the Bear Flag? She hit a drunk and got
his tooth in her fist and it’s infected clear to the elbow. She showed
me the tooth. It was out of a plate. Is a false tooth poison, Doc?”

“I guess everything that comes out of the human mouth is poison,” said
Doc warningfully. “Has she got a doctor?”

“The bouncer fixed her up,” said Mack.

“I’ll take her some sulfa,” said Doc, and he waited for the storm to
break. He knew Mack had come for something and Mack knew he knew it.

Mack said, “Doc, you got any need for any kind of animals now?”

Doc sighed with relief. “Why?” he asked guardedly.

Mack became open and confidential. “I’ll tell you, Doc. I and the boys
got to get some dough—we simply got to. It’s for a good purpose, you
might say a worthy cause.”

“Phyllis Mae’s arm?”

Mack saw the chance, weighed it and gave it up. “Well—no,” he said.
“It’s more important than that. You can’t kill a whore. No—this is
different. I and the boys thought if you needed something why we’d get
it for you and that way we could make a little piece of change.”

It seemed simple and innocent. Doc laid down four more starfish in
lines. “I could use three or four hundred frogs,” he said. “I’d get them
myself but I’ve got to go down to La Jolla tonight. There’s a good tide
tomorrow and I have to get some octopi.”

“Same price for frogs?” Mack asked. “Five cents apiece?”

“Same price,” said Doc.

Mack was jovial. “Don’t you worry about frogs, Doc,” he said. “We’ll get
you all the frogs you want. You just rest easy about frogs. Why we can
get them right up Carmel River. I know a place.”

“Good,” said Doc. “I’ll take all you get but I need about three
hundred.”

“Just you rest easy, Doc. Don’t you lose no sleep about it. You’ll get
your frogs, maybe seven eight hundred.” He put the Doc at his ease about
frogs and then a little cloud crossed Mack’s face. “Doc,” he said, “any
chance of using your car to go up the Valley?”

“No,” said Doc. “I told you. I have to drive to La Jolla tonight to make
tomorrow’s tide.”

“Oh,” said Mack dispiritedly. “Oh. Well, don’t you worry about it, Doc.
Maybe we can get Lee Chong’s old truck.” And then his face fell a little
further. “Doc,” he said, “on a business deal like this, would you
advance two or three bucks for gasoline? I know Lee Chong won’t give us
gas.”

“No,” said Doc. He had fallen into this before. Once he had financed Gay
to go for turtles. He financed him for two weeks and at the end of that
time Gay was in jail on his wife’s charge and he never did go for
turtles.

“Well, maybe we can’t go then,” said Mack sadly.

Now Doc really needed the frogs. He tried to work out some method which
was business and not philanthropy. “I’ll tell you what I’ll do,” he
said. “I’ll give you a note to my gas station so you can get ten gallons
of gas. How will that be?”

Mack smiled. “Fine,” he said. “That will work out just fine. I and the
boys will get an early start tomorrow. Time you get back from the south,
we’ll have more damn frogs than you ever seen in your life.”

Doc went to the labeling desk and wrote a note to Red Williams at the
gas station, authorizing the issue of ten gallons of gasoline to Mack.
“Here you are,” he said.

Mack was smiling broadly. “Doc,” he said, “you can get to sleep tonight
and not even give frogs a thought. We’ll have piss pots full of them by
the time you get back.”

Doc watched him go a little uneasily. Doc’s dealings with Mack and the
boys had always been interesting but rarely had they been profitable to
Doc. He remembered ruefully the time Mack sold him fifteen tom cats and
by night the owners came and got every one. “Mack,” he had asked, “why
all tom cats?”

Mack said, “Doc, it’s my own invention but I’ll tell you because you’re
a good friend. You make a big wire trap and then you don’t use bait. You
use—well—you use a lady cat. Catch every God damn tom cat in the
country that way.”

From the laboratory Mack crossed the street and went through the
swinging screen doors into Lee Chong’s grocery. Mrs. Lee was cutting
bacon on the big butcher’s block. A Lee cousin primped up slightly
wilted heads of lettuce the way a girl primps a loose finger wave. A cat
lay asleep on a big pile of oranges. Lee Chong stood in his usual place
back of the cigar counter and in front of the liquor shelves. His
tapping finger on the change mat speeded up a little when Mack came in.

Mack wasted no time in sparring. “Lee,” he said, “Doc over there’s got a
problem. He’s got a big order for frogs from the New York Museum. Means
a lot to Doc. Besides the dough there’s a lot of credit getting an order
like that. Doc’s got to go south and I and the boys said we’d help him
out. I think a guy’s friends ought to help him out of a hole when they
can, especially a nice guy like Doc. Why I bet he spends sixty seventy
dollars a month with you.”

Lee Chong remained silent and watchful. His fat finger barely moved on
the change mat but it flicked slightly like a tense cat’s tail.

Mack plunged into his thesis. “Will you let us take your old truck to go
up Carmel Valley for frogs for Doc—for good old Doc?”

Lee Chong smiled in triumph. “Tluck no good,” he said. “Bloke down.”

This staggered Mack for a moment but he recovered. He spread the order
for gasoline on the cigar counter. “Look!” he said. “Doc needs them
frogs. He give me this order for gas to get them. I can’t let Doc down.
Now Gay is a good mechanic. If he fixes your truck and puts it in good
shape, will you let us take it?”

Lee put back his head so that he could see Mack through his
half-glasses. There didn’t seem to be anything wrong with the
proposition. The truck really wouldn’t run. Gay really was a good
mechanic and the order for gasoline was definite evidence of good faith.

“How long you be gone?” Lee asked.

“Maybe half a day, maybe a whole day. Just ’til we get the frogs.”

Lee was worried but he couldn’t see any way out. The dangers were all
there and Lee knew all of them. “Okay,” said Lee.

“Good,” said Mack. “I knew Doc could depend on you. I’ll get Gay right
to work on that truck.” He turned about to leave. “By the way,” he said.
“Doc’s paying us five cents apiece for those frogs. We’re going to get
seven or eight hundred. How about taking a pint of Old Tennis Shoes just
’til we can get back with the frogs?”

“No!” said Lee Chong.


                               CHAPTER 10

FRANKIE BEGAN coming to Western Biological when he was eleven years old.
For a week or so he just stood outside the basement door and looked in.
Then one day he stood inside the door. Ten days later he was in the
basement. He had very large eyes and his hair was a dark wiry dirty
shock. His hands were filthy. He picked up a piece of excelsior and put
it in a garbage can and then he looked at Doc where he worked labeling
specimen bottles containing purple Velella. Finally Frankie got to the
work bench and he put his dirty fingers on the bench. It took Frankie
three weeks to get that far and he was ready to bolt every instant of
the time.

Finally one day Doc spoke to him. “What’s your name, son?”

“Frankie.”

“Where do you live?”

“Up there,” a gesture up the hill.

“Why aren’t you in school?”

“I don’t go to school.”

“Why not?”

“They don’t want me there.”

“Your hands are dirty. Don’t you ever wash?”

Frankie looked stricken and then he went to the sink and scrubbed his
hands and always afterwards he scrubbed his hands almost raw every day.

And he came to the laboratory every day. It was an association without
much talk. Doc by a telephone call established that what Frankie said
was true. They didn’t want him in school. He couldn’t learn and there
was something a little wrong with his co-ordination. There was no place
for him. He wasn’t an idiot, he wasn’t dangerous, his parents, or
parent, would not pay for his keep in an institution. Frankie didn’t
often sleep at the laboratory but he spent his days there. And sometimes
he crawled in the excelsior crate and slept. That was probably when
there was a crisis at home.

Doc asked, “Why do you come here?”

“You don’t hit me or give me a nickel,” said Frankie.

“Do they hit you at home?”

“There’s uncles around all the time at home. Some of them hit me and
tell me to get out and some of them give me a nickel and tell me to get
out.”

“Where’s your father?”

“Dead,” said Frankie vaguely.

“Where’s your mother?”

“With the uncles.”

Doc clipped Frankie’s hair and got rid of the lice. At Lee Chong’s he
got him a new pair of overalls and a striped sweater and Frankie became
his slave.

“I love you,” he said one afternoon. “Oh, I love you.”

He wanted to work in the laboratory. He swept out every day, but there
was something a little wrong. He couldn’t get a floor quite clean. He
tried to help with grading crayfish for size. There they were in a
bucket, all sizes. They were to be grouped in the big pans—laid
out—all the three-inch ones together and all the four-inch ones and so
forth. Frankie tried and the perspiration stood on his forehead but he
couldn’t do it. Size relationships just didn’t get through to him.

“No,” Doc would say. “Look, Frankie. Put them beside your finger like
this so you’ll know which ones are this long. See? This one goes from
the tip of your finger to the base of your thumb. Now you just pick out
another one that goes from the tip of your finger down to the same place
and it will be right.” Frankie tried and he couldn’t do it. When Doc
went upstairs Frankie crawled in the excelsior box and didn’t come out
all afternoon.

But Frankie was a nice, good, kind boy. He learned to light Doc’s cigars
and he wanted Doc to smoke all the time so he could light the cigars.

Better than anything else Frankie loved it when there were parties
upstairs in the laboratory. When girls and men gathered to sit and talk,
when the great phonograph played music that throbbed in his stomach and
made beautiful and huge pictures form vaguely in his head, Frankie loved
it. Then he crouched down in a corner behind a chair where he was hidden
and could watch and listen. When there was laughter at a joke he didn’t
understand Frankie laughed delightedly behind his chair and when the
conversation dealt with abstractions his brow furrowed and he became
intent and serious.

One afternoon he did a desperate thing. There was a small party in the
laboratory. Doc was in the kitchen pouring beer when Frankie appeared
beside him. Frankie grabbed a glass of beer and rushed it through the
door and gave it to a girl sitting in a big chair.

She took the glass and said, “Why, thank you,” and she smiled at him.

And Doc coming through the door said, “Yes, Frankie is a great help to
me.”

Frankie couldn’t forget that. He did the thing in his mind over and
over, just how he had taken the glass and just how the girl sat and then
her voice—“Why, thank you,” and Doc—“a great help to me—Frankie is a
great help to me—sure Frankie is a great help—Frankie,” and Oh my God!

He knew a big party was coming because Doc bought steaks and a great
deal of beer and Doc let him help clean out all the upstairs. But that
was nothing, for a great plan had formed in Frankie’s mind and he could
see just how it would be. He went over it again and again. It was
beautiful. It was perfect.

Then the party started and people came and sat in the front room, girls
and young women and men.

Frankie had to wait until he had the kitchen to himself and the door
closed. And it was some time before he had it so. But at last he was
alone and the door was shut. He could hear the chatter of conversation
and the music from the great phonograph. He worked very quietly—first
the tray—then get out the glasses without breaking any. Now fill them
with beer and let the foam settle a little and then fill again.

Now he was ready. He took a great breath and opened the door. The music
and the talk roared around him. Frankie picked up the tray of beer and
walked through the door. He knew how. He went straight toward the same
young woman who had thanked him before. And then right in front of her,
the thing happened, the co-ordination failed, the hands fumbled, the
panicked muscles, the nerves telegraphed to a dead operator, the
responses did not come back. Tray and beer collapsed forward into the
young woman’s lap. For a moment Frankie stood still. And then he turned
and ran.

The room was quiet. They could hear him run downstairs, and go into the
cellar. They heard a hollow scrabbling sound—and then silence.

Doc walked quietly down the stairs and into the cellar. Frankie was in
the excelsior box burrowed down clear to the bottom, with the pile of
excelsior on top of him. Doc could hear him whimpering there. Doc waited
for a moment and then he went quietly back upstairs.

There wasn’t a thing in the world he could do.


                               CHAPTER 11

THE MODEL T FORD truck of Lee Chong had a dignified history. In 1923 it
had been a passenger car belonging to Dr. W. T. Waters. He used it for
five years and sold it to an insurance man named Rattle. Mr. Rattle was
not a careful man. The car he got in clean nice condition he drove like
fury. Mr. Rattle drank on Saturday nights and the car suffered. The
fenders were broken and bent. He was a pedal rider too and the bands had
to be changed often. When Mr. Rattle embezzled a client’s money and ran
away to San José, he was caught with a high-hair blonde and sent up
within ten days.

The body of the car was so battered that its next owner cut it in two
and added a little truck bed.

The next owner took off the front of the cab and the windshield. He used
it to haul squids and he liked a fresh breeze to blow in his face. His
name was Francis Almones and he had a sad life, for he always made just
a fraction less than he needed to live. His father had left him a little
money but year by year and month by month, no matter how hard Francis
worked or how careful he was, his money grew less until he just dried up
and blew away.

Lee Chong got the truck in payment of a grocery bill.

By this time the truck was little more than four wheels and an engine
and the engine was so crotchety and sullen and senile that it required
expert care and consideration. Lee Chong did not give it these things,
with the result that the truck stood in the tall grass back of the
grocery most of the time with the mallows growing between its spokes. It
had solid tires on its back wheels and blocks held its front wheels off
the ground.

Probably any one of the boys from the Palace Flophouse could have made
the truck run, for they were all competent practical mechanics, but Gay
was an inspired mechanic. There is no term comparable to green thumbs to
apply to such a mechanic, but there should be. For there are men who can
look, listen, tap, make an adjustment, and a machine works. Indeed there
are men near whom a car runs better. And such a one was Gay. His fingers
on a timer or a carburetor adjustment screw were gentle and wise and
sure. He could fix the delicate electric motors in the laboratory. He
could have worked in the canneries all the time had he wished, for in
that industry, which complains bitterly when it does not make back its
total investment every year in profits, the machinery is much less
important than the fiscal statement. Indeed, if you could can sardines
with ledgers, the owners would have been very happy. As it was they used
decrepit, struggling old horrors of machines that needed the constant
attention of a man like Gay.

Mack got the boys up early. They had their coffee and immediately moved
over to the truck where it lay among the weeds. Gay was in charge. He
kicked the blocked-up front wheels. “Go borrow a pump and get those
pumped up,” he said. Then he put a stick in the gasoline tank under the
board which served as a seat. By some miracle there was a half inch of
gasoline in the tank. Now Gay went over the most probable difficulties.
He took out the coil boxes, scraped the points, adjusted the gap, and
put them back. He opened the carburetor to see that gas came through. He
pushed on the crank to see that the whole shaft wasn’t frozen and the
pistons rusted in their cylinders.

Meanwhile the pump arrived and Eddie and Jones spelled each other on the
tires.

Gay hummed, “Dum tiddy—dum tiddy,” as he worked. He removed the spark
plugs and scraped the points and bored the carbon out. Then Gay drained
a little gasoline into a can and poured some into each cylinder before
he put the spark plugs back. He straightened up. “We’re going to need a
couple of dry cells,” he said. “See if Lee Chong will let us have a
couple.”

Mack departed and returned almost immediately with a universal No which
was designed by Lee Chong to cover all future requests.

Gay thought deeply. “I know where’s a couple—pretty good ones too, but
I won’t go get them.”

“Where?” asked Mack.

“Down cellar at my house,” said Gay. “They run the front doorbell. If
one of you fellas wants to kind of edge into my cellar without my wife
seeing you, they’re on top of the side stringer on the left-hand side as
you go in. But for God’s sake, don’t let my wife catch you.”

A conference elected Eddie to go and he departed.

“If you get caught don’t mention me,” Gay called out after him.
Meanwhile Gay tested the bands. The low-high pedal didn’t quite touch
the floor so he knew there was a little band left. The brake pedal did
touch the floor so there was no brake, but the reverse pedal had lots of
band left. On a Model T Ford the reverse is your margin of safety. When
your brake is gone, you can use reverse as a brake. And when the low
gear band is worn too thin to pull up a steep hill, why you can turn
around and back up it. Gay found there was plenty of reverse and he knew
everything was all right.

It was a good omen that Eddie came back with the dry cells without
trouble. Mrs. Gay had been in the kitchen. Eddie could hear her walking
about but she didn’t hear Eddie. He was very good at such things.

Gay connected the dry cells and he advanced the gas and retarded the
spark lever. “Twist her tail,” he said.

He was such a wonder, Gay was—the little mechanic of God, the St.
Francis of all things that turn and twist and explode, the St. Francis
of coils and armatures and gears. And if at some time all the heaps of
jalopies, cut-down Dusenbergs, Buicks, De Sotos and Plymouths, American
Austins and Isotta-Fraschinis praise God in a great chorus—it will be
largely due to Gay and his brotherhood.

One twist—one little twist and the engine caught and labored and
faltered and caught again. Gay advanced the spark and reduced the gas.
He switched over to the magneto and the Ford of Lee Chong chuckled and
jiggled and clattered happily as though it knew it was working for a man
who loved and understood it.

There were two small technical legal difficulties with the truck—it had
no recent license plates and it had no lights. But the boys hung a rag
permanently and accidentally on the rear plate to conceal its vintage
and they dabbed the front plate with good thick mud. The equipment of
the expedition was slight: some long-handled frog nets and some gunny
sacks. City hunters going out for sport load themselves with food and
liquor, but not Mack. He presumed rightly that the country was where
food came from. Two loaves of bread and what was left of Eddie’s wining
jug was all the supply. The party clambered on the truck—Gay drove and
Mack sat beside him; they bumped around the corner of Lee Chong’s and
down through the lot, threading among the pipes. Mr. Malloy waved at
them from his seat by the boiler. Gay eased across the sidewalk and down
off the curb gently because the front tires showed fabric all the way
around. With all their alacrity, it was afternoon when they got started.

The truck eased into Red Williams’ service station. Mack got out and
gave his paper to Red. He said, “Doc was a little short of change. So if
you’ll put five gallons in and just give us a buck instead of the other
five gallons, why that’s what Doc wants. He had to go south, you know.
Had a big deal down there.”

Red smiled good-naturedly. “You know, Mack,” he said, “Doc got to
figuring if there was some kind of loophole, and he put his finger on
the same one you did. Doc’s a pretty bright fellow. So he phoned me last
night.”

“Put in the whole ten gallons,” said Mack. “No—wait. It’ll slop around
and spill. Put in five and give us five in a can—one of them sealed
cans.”

Red smiled happily. “Doc kind of figured that one too,” he said.

“Put in ten gallons,” said Mack. “And don’t go leaving none in the
hose.”

The little expedition did not go through the center of Monterey. A
delicacy about the license plates and the lights made Gay choose back
streets. There would be the time when they would go up Carmel Hill and
down into the Valley, a good four miles on a main highway, exposed to
any passing cop until they turned up the fairly unfrequented Carmel
Valley road. Gay chose a back street that brought them out on the main
highway at Peter’s Gate just before the steep Carmel Hill starts. Gay
took a good noisy clattering run at the hill and in fifty yards he put
the pedal down to low. He knew it wouldn’t work, the band was worn too
thin. On the level it was all right but not on a hill. He stopped, let
the truck back around and aimed it down the hill. Then he gave it the
gas and the reverse pedal. And the reverse was not worn. The truck
crawled steadily and slowly but backward up Carmel Hill.

And they very nearly made it. The radiator boiled, of course, but most
Model T experts believed that it wasn’t working well if it wasn’t
boiling.

Someone should write an erudite essay on the moral, physical, and
esthetic effect of the Model T Ford on the American nation. Two
generations of Americans knew more about the Ford coil than the
clitoris, about the planetary system of gears than the solar system of
stars. With the Model T, part of the concept of private property
disappeared. Pliers ceased to be privately owned and a tire pump
belonged to the last man who had picked it up. Most of the babies of the
period were conceived in Model T Fords and not a few were born in them.
The theory of the Anglo Saxon home became so warped that it never quite
recovered.

The truck backed sturdily up Carmel Hill and it got past the Jack’s Peak
road and was just going into the last and steepest pull when the motor’s
breathing thickened, gulped, and strangled. It seemed very quiet when
the motor was still. Gay, who was heading downhill anyway, ran down the
hill fifty feet and turned into the Jack’s Peak road entrance.

“What is it?” Mack asked.

“Carburetor, I think,” said Gay. The engine sizzled and creaked with
heat and the jet of steam that blew down the overflow pipe sounded like
the hiss of an alligator.

The carburetor of a Model T is not complicated but it needs all of its
parts to function. There is a needle valve, and the point must be on the
needle and must sit in its hole or the carburetor does not work.

Gay held the needle in his hand and the point was broken off. “How in
hell you s’pose that happened?” he asked.

“Magic,” said Mack, “just pure magic. Can you fix it?”

“Hell, no,” said Gay. “Got to get another one.”

“How much they cost?”

“About a buck if you buy one new—quarter at a wrecker’s.”

“You got a buck?” Mack asked.

“Yeah, but I won’t need it.”

“Well, get back as soon as you can, will you? We’ll just stay right
here.”

“Anyways you won’t go running off without a needle valve,” said Gay. He
stepped out to the road. He thumbed three cars before one stopped for
him. The boys watched him climb in and start down the hill. They didn’t
see him again for one hundred and eighty days.

Oh, the infinity of possibility! How could it happen that the car that
picked up Gay broke down before it got into Monterey? If Gay had not
been a mechanic, he would not have fixed the car. If he had not fixed it
the owner wouldn’t have taken him to Jimmy Brucia’s for a drink. And why
was it Jimmy’s birthday? Out of all the possibilities in the world —the
millions of them—only events occurred that lead to the Salinas jail.
Sparky Enea and Tiny Colletti had made up a quarrel and were helping
Jimmy to celebrate his birthday. The blonde came in. The musical
argument in front of the juke box. Gay’s new friend who knew a judo hold
and tried to show it to Sparky and got his wrist broken when the hold
went wrong. The policeman with a bad stomach—all unrelated, irrelevant
details and yet all running in one direction. Fate just didn’t intend
Gay to go on that frog hunt and Fate took a hell of a lot of trouble and
people and accidents to keep him from it. When the final climax came
with the front of Holman’s bootery broken out and the party trying on
the shoes in the display window only Gay didn’t hear the fire whistle.
Only Gay didn’t go to the fire and when the police came they found him
sitting all alone in Holman’s window wearing one brown oxford and one
patent leather dress shoe with a gray cloth top.

Back at the truck the boys built a little fire when it got dark and the
chill crept up from the ocean. The pines above them soughed in the fresh
sea wind. The boys lay in the pine needles and looked at the lonely sky
through the pine branches. For a while they spoke of the difficulties
Gay must be having getting a needle valve and then gradually as the time
passed they didn’t mention him any more.

“Somebody should of gone with him,” said Mack.

About ten o’clock Eddie got up. “There’s a construction camp a piece up
the hill,” he said. “I think I’ll go up and see if they got any Model
T’s.”


                               CHAPTER 12

MONTEREY is a city with a long and brilliant literary tradition. It
remembers with pleasure and some glory that Robert Louis Stevenson lived
there. Treasure Island certainly has the topography and the coastal plan
of Pt. Lobos. More recently in Carmel there have been a great number of
literary men about, but there is not the old flavor, the old dignity of
the true belles-lettres. Once the town was greatly outraged over what
the citizens considered a slight to an author. It had to do with the
death of Josh Billings, the great humorist.

Where the new postoffice is, there used to be a deep gulch with water
flowing in it and a little foot bridge over it. On one side of the gulch
was a fine old adobe and on the other the house of the doctor who
handled all the sickness, birth, and death in the town. He worked with
animals too and, having studied in France, he even dabbled in the new
practice of embalming bodies before they were buried. Some of the
old-timers considered this sentimental and some thought it wasteful and
to some it was sacrilegious since there was no provision for it in any
sacred volume. But the better and richer families were coming to it and
it looked to become a fad.

One morning elderly Mr. Carriaga was walking from his house on the hill
down toward Alvarado Street. He was just crossing the foot bridge when
his attention was drawn to a small boy and a dog struggling up out of
the gulch. The boy carried a liver while the dog dragged yards of
intestine at the end of which a stomach dangled. Mr. Carriaga paused and
addressed the little boy politely: “Good morning.”

In those days little boys were courteous. “Good morning, sir.”

“Where are you going with the liver?”

“I’m going to make some chum and catch some mackerel.”

Mr. Carriaga smiled. “And the dog, will he catch mackerel too?”

“The dog found that. It’s his, sir. We found them in the gulch.”

Mr. Carriaga smiled and strolled on and then his mind began to work.
That isn’t a beef liver, it’s too small. And it isn’t a calf’s liver,
it’s too red. It isn’t a sheep’s liver—Now his mind was alert. At the
corner he met Mr. Ryan.

“Anyone die in Monterey last night?” he asked.

“Not that I know of,” said Mr. Ryan.

“Anyone killed?”

“No.”

They walked on together and Mr. Carriaga told about the little boy and
the dog.

At the Adobe Bar a number of citizens were gathered for their morning
conversation. There Mr. Carriaga told his story again and he had just
finished when the constable came into the Adobe. He should know if
anyone had died. “No one died in Monterey,” he said. “But Josh Billings
died out at the Hotel del Monte.”

The men in the bar were silent. And the same thought went through all
their minds. Josh Billings was a great man, a great writer. He had
honored Monterey by dying there and he had been degraded. Without much
discussion a committee formed made up of everyone there. The stern men
walked quickly to the gulch and across the foot bridge and they hammered
on the door of the doctor who had studied in France.

He had worked late. The knocking got him out of bed and brought him
tousled of hair and beard to the door in his nightgown. Mr. Carriaga
addressed him sternly: “Did you embalm Josh Billings?”

“Why—yes.”

“What did you do with his tripes?”

“Why—I threw them in the gulch where I always do.”

They made him dress quickly then and they hurried down to the beach. If
the little boy had gone quickly about his business, it would have been
too late. He was just getting into a boat when the committee arrived.
The intestine was in the sand where the dog had abandoned it.

Then the French doctor was made to collect the parts. He was forced to
wash them reverently and pick out as much sand as possible. The doctor
himself had to stand the expense of the leaden box which went into the
coffin of Josh Billings. For Monterey was not a town to let dishonor
come to a literary man.


                               CHAPTER 13

MACK AND the boys slept peacefully on the pine needles. Some time before
dawn Eddie came back. He had gone a long way before he found a Model T.
And then when he did, he wondered whether or not it would be a good idea
to take the needle out of its seat. It might not fit. So he took the
whole carburetor. The boys didn’t wake up when he got back. He lay down
beside them and slept under the pine trees. There was one nice thing
about Model T’s. The parts were not only interchangeable, they were
unidentifiable.

There is a beautiful view from the Carmel grade, the curving bay with
the waves creaming on the sand, the dune country around Seaside and
right at the bottom of the hill, the warm intimacy of the town.

Mack got up in the dawn and hustled his pants where they bound him and
he stood looking down on the bay. He could see some of the purse-seiners
coming in. A tanker stood over against Seaside, taking on oil. Behind
him the rabbits stirred in the bush. Then the sun came up and shook the
night chill out of the air the way you’d shake a rug. When he felt the
first sun warmth, Mack shivered.

The boys ate a little bread while Eddie installed the new carburetor.
And when it was ready, they didn’t bother to crank it. They pushed it
out to the highway and coasted in gear until it started. And then Eddie
driving, they backed up over the rise, over the top and turned and
headed forward and down past Hatton Fields. In Carmel Valley the
artichoke plants stood gray green, and the willows were lush along the
river. They turned left up the valley. Luck blossomed from the first. A
dusty Rhode Island red rooster who had wandered too far from his own
farmyard crossed the road and Eddie hit him without running too far off
the road. Sitting in the back of the truck, Hazel picked him as they
went and let the feathers fly from his hand, the most widely distributed
evidence on record, for there was a little breeze in the morning blowing
down from Jamesburg and some of the red chicken feathers were deposited
on Pt. Lobos and some even blew out to sea.

The Carmel is a lovely little river. It isn’t very long but in its
course it has everything a river should have. It rises in the mountains,
and tumbles down a while, runs through shallows, is dammed to make a
lake, spills over the dam, crackles among round boulders, wanders lazily
under sycamores, spills into pools where trout live, drops in against
banks where crayfish live. In the winter it becomes a torrent, a mean
little fierce river, and in the summer it is a place for children to
wade in and for fishermen to wander in. Frogs blink from its banks and
the deep ferns grow beside it. Deer and foxes come to drink from it,
secretly in the morning and evening, and now and then a mountain lion
crouched flat laps its water. The farms of the rich little valley back
up to the river and take its water for the orchards and the vegetables.
The quail call beside it and the wild doves come whistling in at dusk.
Raccoons pace its edges looking for frogs. It’s everything a river
should be.

A few miles up the valley the river cuts in under a high cliff from
which vines and ferns hang down. At the base of this cliff there is a
pool, green and deep, and on the other side of the pool there is a
little sandy place where it is good to sit and to cook your dinner.

Mack and the boys came down to this place happily. It was perfect. If
frogs were available, they would be here. It was a place to relax, a
place to be happy. On the way out they had thriven. In addition to the
big red chicken there was a sack of carrots which had fallen from a
vegetable truck, half a dozen onions which had not. Mack had a bag of
coffee in his pocket. In the truck there was a five-gallon can with the
top cut off. The wining jug was nearly half full. Such things as salt
and pepper had been brought. Mack and the boys would have thought anyone
who traveled without salt, pepper, and coffee very silly indeed.

Without effort, confusion, or much thought, four round stones were
rolled together on the little beach. The rooster who had challenged the
sunrise of this very day lay dismembered and clean in water in the
five-gallon can with peeled onions about him, while a little fire of
dead willow sticks sputtered between the stones, a very little fire.
Only fools build big fires. It would take a long time to cook this
rooster, for it had taken him a long time to achieve his size and
muscularity. But as the water began to boil gently about him, he smelled
good from the beginning.

Mack gave them a pep talk. “The best time for frogs is at night,” he
said, “so I guess we’ll just lay around ’til it gets dark.” They sat in
the shade and gradually one by one they stretched out and slept.

Mack was right. Frogs do not move around much in the daytime; they hide
under ferns and they look secretly out of holes under rocks. The way to
catch frogs is with a flashlight at night. The men slept knowing they
might have a very active night. Only Hazel stayed awake to replenish the
little fire under the cooking chicken.

There is no golden afternoon next to the cliff. When the sun went over
it at about two o’clock a whispering shade came to the beach. The
sycamores rustled in the afternoon breeze. Little water snakes slipped
down to the rocks and then gently entered the water and swam along
through the pool, their heads held up like little periscopes and a tiny
wake spreading behind them. A big trout jumped in the pool. The gnats
and mosquitoes which avoid the sun came out and buzzed over the water.
All of the sun bugs, the flies, the dragonflies, the wasps, the hornets,
went home. And as the shadow came to the beach, as the first quail began
to call, Mack and the boys awakened. The smell of the chicken stew was
heartbreaking. Hazel had picked a fresh bay leaf from a tree by the
river and he had dropped it in. The carrots were in now. Coffee in its
own can was simmering on its own rock, far enough from the flame so that
it did not boil too hard. Mack awakened, started up, stretched,
staggered to the pool, washed his face with cupped hands, hacked, spat,
washed out his mouth, broke wind, tightened his belt, scratched his
legs, combed his wet hair with his fingers, drank from the jug, belched
and sat down by the fire. “By God that smells good,” he said.

Men all do about the same things when they wake up. Mack’s process was
loosely the one all of them followed. And soon they had all come to the
fire and complimented Hazel. Hazel stuck his pocket knife into the
muscles of the chicken.

“He ain’t going to be what you’d call tender,” said Hazel. “You’d have
to cook him about two weeks to get him tender. How old about do you
judge he was, Mack?”

“I’m forty-eight and I ain’t as tough as he is,” said Mack.

Eddie said, “How old can a chicken get, do you think—that’s if nobody
pushes him around or he don’t get sick?”

“That’s something nobody isn’t ever going to find out,” said Jones.

It was a pleasant time. The jug went around and warmed them.

Jones said, “Eddie, I don’t mean to complain none. I was just thinkin’.
S’pose you had two or three jugs back of the bar. S’pose you put all the
whiskey in one and all the wine in another and all the beer in
another—”

A slightly shocked silence followed the suggestion. “I didn’t mean
nothing,” said Jones quickly. “I like it this way—” Jones talked too
much then because he knew he had made a social blunder and he wasn’t
able to stop. “What I like about it this way is you never know what kind
of a drunk you’re going to get out of it,” he said. “You take whiskey,”
he said hurriedly. “You more or less know what you’ll do. A fightin’ guy
fights and a cryin’ guy cries, but this—” he said magnanimously—“why
you don’t know whether it’ll run you up a pine tree or start you
swimming to Santa Cruz. It’s more fun that way,” he said weakly.

“Speaking of swimming,” said Mack to fill in the indelicate place in the
conversation and to shut Jones up. “I wonder whatever happened to that
guy McKinley Moran. Remember that deep sea diver?”

“I remember him,” said Hughie. “I and him used to hang around together.
He just didn’t get much work and then he got to drinking. It’s kind of
tough on you divin’ and drinkin’. Got to worryin’ too. Finally he sold
his suit and helmet and pump and went on a hell of a drunk and then he
left town. I don’t know where he went. He wasn’t no good after he went
down after that Wop that got took down with the anchor from the Twelve
Brothers. McKinley just dove down. Bust his eardrums, and he wasn’t no
good after that. Didn’t hurt the Wop a bit.”

Mack sampled the jug again. “He used to make a lot of dough during
Prohibition,” Mack said. “Used to get twenty-five bucks a day from the
government to dive lookin’ for liquor on the bottom and he got three
dollars a case from Louie for not findin’ it. Had it worked out so he
brought up one case a day to keep the government happy. Louie didn’t
mind that none. Made it so they didn’t get in no new divers. McKinley
made a lot of dough.”

“Yeah,” said Hughie. “But he’s like everybody else—gets some dough and
he wants to get married. He got married three times before his dough run
out. I could always tell. He’d buy a white fox fur piece and bang!—next
thing you’d know, he’s married.”

“I wonder what happened to Gay,” Eddie asked. It was the first time they
had spoken of him.

“Same thing, I guess,” said Mack. “You just can’t trust a married guy.
No matter how much he hates his old lady why he’ll go back to her. Get
to thinkin’ and broodin’ and back he’ll go. You can’t trust him no more.
Take Gay,” said Mack. “His old lady hits him. But I bet you when Gay’s
away from her three days, he gets it figured out that it’s his fault and
he goes back to make it up to her.”

They ate long and daintily, spearing out pieces of chicken, holding the
dripping pieces until they cooled and then gnawing the muscled meat from
the bone. They speared the carrots on pointed willow switches and
finally they passed the can and drank the juice. And around them the
evening crept in as delicately as music. The quail called each other
down to the water. The trout jumped in the pool. And the moths came down
and fluttered about the pool as the daylight mixed into the darkness.
They passed the coffee can about and they were warm and fed and silent.
At last Mack said, “God damn it. I hate a liar.”

“Who’s been lyin’ to you?” Eddie asked.

“Oh, I don’t mind a guy that tells a little one to get along or to hop
up a conversation, but I hate a guy that lies to himself.”

“Who done that?” Eddie asked.

“Me,” said Mack. “And maybe you guys. Here we are,” he said earnestly,
“the whole God damned shabby lot of us. We worked it out that we wanted
to give Doc a party. So we come out here and have a hell of a lot of
fun. Then we’ll go back and get the dough from Doc. There’s five of us,
so we’ll drink five times as much liquor as he will. And I ain’t sure
we’re doin’ it for Doc. I ain’t sure we ain’t doin’ it for ourselves.
And Doc’s too nice a fella to do that to. Doc is the nicest fella I ever
knew. I don’t want to be the kind of a guy that would take advantage of
him. You know one time I put the bee on him for a buck. I give him a
hell of a story. Right in the middle I seen he knew God damn well the
story was so much malarky. So right in the middle I says, ‘Doc, that’s a
fuggin’ lie!’ And he put his hand in his pocket and brought out a buck.
‘Mack,’ he says, ‘I figure a guy that needs it bad enough to make up a
lie to get it, really needs it,’ and he give me the buck. I paid him
that buck back the next day. I never did spend it. Just kept it
overnight and then give it back to him.”

Hazel said, “There ain’t nobody likes a party better than Doc. We’re
givin’ him the party. What the hell is the beef?”

“I don’t know,” said Mack, “I’d just like to give him something when I
didn’t get most of it back.”

“How about a present?” Hughie suggested. “S’pose we just bought the
whiskey and give it to him and let him do what he wants.”

“Now you’re talkin’,” said Mack. “That’s just what we’ll do. We’ll just
give him the whiskey and fade out.”

“You know what’ll happen,” said Eddie. “Henri and them people from
Carmel will smell that whiskey out and then instead of only five of us
there’ll be twenty. Doc told me one time himself they can smell him
fryin’ a steak from Cannery Row clear down to Point Sur. I don’t see the
percentage. He’d come out better if we give him the party ourselves.”

Mack considered this reasoning. “Maybe you’re right,” he said at last.
“But s’pose we give him something except whiskey, maybe cuff links with
his initials.”

“Oh, horse shit,” said Hazel. “Doc don’t want stuff like that.”

The night was in by now and the stars were white in the sky. Hazel fed
the fire and it put a little room of light on the beach. Over the hill a
fox was barking sharply. And now in the night the smell of sage came
down from the hills. The water chuckled on the stones where it went out
of the deep pool.

Mack was mulling over the last piece of reasoning when the sound of
footsteps on the ground made them turn. A man dark and large stalked
near and he had a shotgun over his arm and a pointer walked shyly and
delicately at his heel.

“What the hell are you doing here?” he asked.

“Nothing,” said Mack.

“The land’s posted. No fishing, hunting, fires, camping. Now you just
pack up and put that fire out and get off this land.”

Mack stood up humbly. “I didn’t know, Captain,” he said. “Honest we
never seen the sign, Captain.”

“There’s signs all over. You couldn’t have missed them.”

“Look, Captain, we made a mistake and we’re sorry,” said Mack. He paused
and looked closely at the slouching figure. “You are a military man,
aren’t you, sir? I can always tell. Military man don’t carry his
shoulders the same as ordinary people. I was in the army so long, I can
always tell.”

Imperceptibly the shoulders of the man straightened, nothing obvious,
but he held himself differently.

“I don’t allow fires on my place,” he said.

“Well, we’re sorry,” said Mack. “We’ll get right out, Captain. You see,
we’re workin’ for some scientists. We’re tryin’ to get some frogs.
They’re workin’ on cancer and were helpin’ out getting some frogs.”

The man hesitated for a moment. “What do they do with the frogs?” he
asked.

“Well, sir,” said Mack, “they give cancer to the frogs and then they can
study and experiment and they got it nearly licked if they can just get
some frogs. But if you don’t want us on your land, Captain, we’ll get
right out. Never would of come in if we knew.” Suddenly Mack seemed to
see the pointer for the first time. “By God that’s a fine-lookin’
bitch,” he said enthusiastically. “She looks like Nola that win the
field trials in Virginia last year. She a Virginia dog, Captain?”

The captain hesitated and then he lied. “Yes,” he said shortly. “She’s
lame. Tick got her right on her shoulder.”

Mack was instantly solicitous. “Mind if I look, Captain? Come, girl.
Come on, girl.” The pointer looked up at her master and then sidled up
to Mack. “Pile on some twigs so I can see,” he said to Hazel.

“It’s up where she can’t lick it,” said the captain and he leaned over
Mack’s shoulder to look.

Mack pressed some pus out of the evil-looking crater on the dog’s
shoulder. “I had a dog once had a thing like this and it went right in
and killed him. She just had pups, didn’t she?”

“Yes,” said the captain, “six. I put iodine on that place.”

“No,” said Mack, “that won’t draw. You got any epsom salts up at your
place?”

“Yes—there’s a big bottle.”

“Well you make a hot poultice of epsom salts and put it on there. She’s
weak, you know, from the pups. Be a shame if she got sick now. You’d
lose the pups too.” The pointer looked deep into Mack’s eyes and then
she licked his hand.

“Tell you what I’ll do, Captain. I’ll look after her myself. Epsom
salts’ll do the trick. That’s the best thing.”

The captain stroked the dog’s head. “You know, I’ve got a pond up by the
house that’s so full of frogs I can’t sleep nights. Why don’t you look
up there? They bellow all night. I’d be glad to get rid of them.”

“That’s mighty nice of you,” said Mack. “I’ll bet those docs would thank
you for that. But I’d like to get a poultice on this dog.” He turned to
the others. “You put out this fire,” he said. “Make sure there ain’t a
spark left and clean up around. You don’t want to leave no mess. I and
the captain will go and take care of Nola here. You fellows follow along
when you get cleared up.” Mack and the captain walked away together.

Hazel kicked sand on the fire. “I bet Mack could of been president of
the U.S. if he wanted,” he said.

“What could he do with it if he had it?” Jones asked. “There wouldn’t be
no fun in that.”


                               CHAPTER 14

EARLY MORNING is a time of magic in Cannery Row. In the gray time after
the light has come and before the sun has risen, the Row seems to hang
suspended out of time in a silvery light. The street lights go out, and
the weeds are a brilliant green. The corrugated iron of the canneries
glows with the pearly lucence of platinum or old pewter. No automobiles
are running then. The street is silent of progress and business. And the
rush and drag of the waves can be heard as they splash in among the
piles of the canneries. It is a time of great peace, a deserted time, a
little era of rest. Cats drip over the fences and slither like syrup
over the ground to look for fish heads. Silent early morning dogs parade
majestically picking and choosing judiciously whereon to pee. The sea
gulls come flapping in to sit on the cannery roofs to await the day of
refuse. They sit on the roof peaks shoulder to shoulder. From the rocks
near the Hopkins Marine Station comes the barking of sea lions like the
baying of hounds. The air is cool and fresh. In the back gardens the
gophers push up the morning mounds of fresh damp earth and they creep
out and drag flowers into their holes. Very few people are about, just
enough to make it seem more deserted than it is. One of Dora’s girls
comes home from a call on a patron too wealthy or too sick to visit the
Bear Flag. Her makeup is a little sticky and her feet are tired. Lee
Chong brings the garbage cans out and stands them on the curb. The old
Chinaman comes out of the sea and flap-flaps across the street and up
past the Palace. The cannery watchmen look out and blink at the morning
light. The bouncer at the Bear Flag steps out on the porch in his
shirtsleeves and stretches and yawns and scratches his stomach. The
snores of Mr. Malloy’s tenants in the pipes have a deep tunnelly
quality. It is the hour of the pearl—the interval between day and night
when time stops and examines itself.

On such a morning and in such a light two soldiers and two girls
strolled easily along the street. They had come out of La Ida and they
were very tired and very happy. The girls were hefty, big breasted and
strong and their blonde hair was in slight disarray. They wore printed
rayon party dresses, wrinkled now and clinging to their convexities. And
each girl wore a soldier’s cap, one far back on her head and the other
with the visor down almost on her nose. They were full-lipped,
broad-nosed, hippy girls and they were very tired.

The soldiers’ tunics were unbuttoned and their belts were threaded
through their epaulets. The ties were pulled down a little so the shirt
collars could be unbuttoned. And the soldiers wore the girls’ hats, one
a tiny yellow straw boater with a bunch of daisies on the crown, the
other a white knitted half-hat to which medallions of blue cellophane
adhered. They walked holding hands, swinging their hands rhythmically.
The soldier on the outside had a large brown paper bag filled with cold
canned beer. They strolled softly in the pearly light. They had had a
hell of a time and they felt good. They smiled delicately like weary
children remembering a party. They looked at one another and smiled and
they swung their hands. Past the Bear Flag they went and said “Hiya,” to
the bouncer who was scratching his stomach. They listened to the snores
from the pipes and laughed a little. At Lee Chong’s they stopped and
looked into the messy display window where tools and clothes and food
crowded for attention. Swinging their hands and scuffing their feet,
they came to the end of Cannery Row and turned up to the railroad track.
The girls climbed up on the rails and walked along on them and the
soldiers put their arms around the plump waists to keep them from
falling. Then they went past the boat works and turned down into the
park-like property of the Hopkins Marine Station. There is a tiny curved
beach in front of the station, a miniature beach between little reefs.
The gentle morning waves licked up the beach and whispered softly. The
fine smell of seaweed came from the exposed rocks. As the four came to
the beach a sliver of the sun broke over Tom Work’s land across the head
of the bay and it gilded the water and made the rocks yellow. The girls
sat formally down in the sand and straightened their skirts over their
knees. One of the soldiers punched holes in four cans of beer and handed
them around. And then the men lay down and put their heads in the girls’
laps and looked up into their faces. And they smiled at each other, a
tired and peaceful and wonderful secret.

From up near the station came the barking of a dog—the watchman, a dark
and surly man, had seen them and his black and surly cocker spaniel had
seen them. He shouted at them and when they did not move he came down on
the beach and his dog barked monotonously. “Don’t you know you can’t lay
around here? You got to get off. This is private property!”

The soldiers did not even seem to hear him. They smiled on and the girls
were stroking their hair over the temples. At last in slow motion one of
the soldiers turned his head so that his cheek was cradled between the
girl’s legs. He smiled benevolently at the caretaker. “Why don’t you
take a flying fuggut the moon?” he said kindly and he turned back to
look at the girl.

The sun lighted her blonde hair and she scratched him over one ear. They
didn’t even see the caretaker go back to his house.


                               CHAPTER 15

BY THE time the boys got up to the farmhouse Mack was in the kitchen.
The pointer bitch lay on her side, and Mack held a cloth saturated with
epsom salts against her tick bite. Among her legs the big fat wiener
pups nuzzled and bumped for milk and the bitch looked patiently up into
Mack’s face saying, “You see how it is? I try to tell him but he doesn’t
understand.”

The captain held a lamp and looked down on Mack.

“I’m glad to know about that,” he said.

Mack said, “I don’t want to tell you about your business, sir, but these
pups ought to be weaned. She ain’t got a hell of a lot of milk left and
them pups are chewin’ her to pieces.”

“I know,” said the captain. “I s’pose I should have drowned them all but
one. I’ve been so busy trying to keep the place going. People don’t take
the interest in bird dogs they used to. It’s all poodles and boxers and
Dobermans.”

“I know,” said Mack. “And there ain’t no dog like a pointer for a man. I
don’t know what’s come over people. But you wouldn’t of drowned them,
would you, sir?”

“Well,” said the captain, “since my wife went into politics, I’m just
running crazy. She got elected to the Assembly for this district and
when the Legislature isn’t in session, she’s off making speeches. And
when she’s home she’s studying all the time and writing bills.”

“Must be lousy in—I mean it must be pretty lonely,” said Mack. “Now if
I had a pup like this—” he picked up a squirming puzz-faced pup—“why I
bet I’d have a real bird dog in three years. I’d take a bitch every
time.”

“Would you like to have one?” the captain asked.

Mack looked up. “You mean you’d let me have one? Oh! Jesus Christ, yes.”

“Take your pick,” said the captain. “Nobody seems to understand bird
dogs any more.”

The boys stood in the kitchen and gathered quick impressions. It was
obvious that the wife was away—the opened cans, the frying pan with
lace from fried eggs still sticking to it, the crumbs on the kitchen
table, the open box of shotgun shells on the bread box all shrieked of
the lack of a woman, while the white curtains and the papers on the dish
shelves and the too small towels on the rack told them a woman had been
there. And they were unconsciously glad she wasn’t there. The kind of
women who put papers on shelves and had little towels like that
instinctively distrusted and disliked Mack and the boys. Such women knew
that they were the worst threats to a home, for they offered ease and
thought and companionship as opposed to neatness, order, and properness.
They were very glad she was away.

Now the captain seemed to feel that they were doing him a favor. He
didn’t want them to leave. He said hesitantly, “S’pose you boys would
like a little something to warm you up before you go out for the frogs?”

The others looked at Mack. Mack was frowning as though he was thinking
it through. “When we’re out doin’ scientific stuff, we make it a kind of
a rule not to touch nothin’,” he said, and then quickly as though he
might have gone too far, “But seein’ as how you been so nice to us—well
I wouldn’t mind a short one myself. I don’t know about the boys.”

The boys agreed that they wouldn’t mind a short one either. The captain
got a flashlight and went down in the cellar. They could hear him moving
lumber and boxes about and he came back upstairs with a five-gallon oak
keg in his arms. He set it on the table. “During Prohibition I got some
corn whiskey and laid it away. I just got to thinking I’d like to see
how it is. It’s pretty old now. I’d almost forgot it. You see—my
wife—” he let it go at that because it was apparent that they
understood. The captain knocked out the oak plug from the end of the keg
and got glasses down from the shelf that had scallop-edged paper laid on
it. It is a hard job to pour a small drink from a five-gallon keg. Each
of them got half a water glass of the clear brown liquor. They waited
ceremoniously for the captain and then they said, “Over the river,” and
tossed it back. They swallowed, tasted their tongues, sucked their lips,
and there was a far-away look in their eyes.

Mack peered into his empty glass as though some holy message were
written in the bottom. And then he raised his eyes. “You can’t say
nothin’ about that,” he said. “They don’t put that in bottles.” He
breathed in deeply and sucked his breath as it came out. “I don’t think
I ever tasted nothin’ as good as that,” he said.

The captain looked pleased. His glance wandered back to the keg. “It is
good,” he said. “You think we might have another little one?”

Mack stared into his glass again. “Maybe a short one,” he agreed.
“Wouldn’t it be easier to pour out some in a pitcher? You’re liable to
spill it that way.”

Two hours later they recalled what they had come for.

The frog pool was square—fifty feet wide and seventy feet long and four
feet deep. Lush soft grass grew about its edge and a little ditch
brought the water from the river to it and from it little ditches went
out to the orchards. There were frogs there all right, thousands of
them. Their voices beat the night, they boomed and barked and croaked
and rattled. They sang to the stars, to the waning moon, to the waving
grasses. They bellowed love songs and challenges. The men crept through
the darkness toward the pool. The captain carried a nearly filled
pitcher of whiskey and every man had his own glass. The captain had
found them flashlights that worked. Hughie and Jones carried gunny
sacks. As they drew quietly near, the frogs heard them coming. The night
had been roaring with frog song and then suddenly it was silent. Mack
and the boys and the captain sat down on the ground to have one last
short one and to map their campaign. And the plan was bold.

During the millennia that frogs and men have lived in the same world, it
is probable that men have hunted frogs. And during that time a pattern
of hunt and parry has developed. The man with net or bow or lance or gun
creeps noiselessly, as he thinks, toward the frog. The pattern requires
that the frog sit still, sit very still and wait. The rules of the game
require the frog to wait until the final flicker of a second, when the
net is descending, when the lance is in the air, when the finger
squeezes the trigger, then the frog jumps, plops into the water, swims
to the bottom and waits until the man goes away. That is the way it is
done, the way it has always been done. Frogs have every right to expect
it will always be done that way. Now and then the net is too quick, the
lance pierces, the gun flicks and that frog is gone, but it is all fair
and in the framework. Frogs don’t resent that. But how could they have
anticipated Mack’s new method? How could they have foreseen the horror
that followed? The sudden flashing of lights, the shouting and squealing
of men, the rush of feet. Every frog leaped, plopped into the pool, and
swam frantically to the bottom. Then into the pool plunged the line of
men, stamping, churning, moving in a crazy line up the pool, flinging
their feet about. Hysterically the frogs displaced from their placid
spots swam ahead of the crazy thrashing feet and the feet came on. Frogs
are good swimmers but they haven’t much endurance. Down the pool they
went until finally they were bunched and crowded against the end. And
the feet and wildly plunging bodies followed them. A few frogs lost
their heads and floundered among the feet and got through and these were
saved. But the majority decided to leave this pool forever, to find a
new home in a new country where this kind of thing didn’t happen. A wave
of frantic, frustrated frogs, big ones, little ones, brown ones, green
ones, men frogs and women frogs, a wave of them broke over the bank,
crawled, leaped, scrambled. They clambered up the grass, they clutched
at each other, little ones rode on big ones. And then—horror on
horror—the flashlights found them. Two men gathered them like berries.
The line came out of the water and closed in on their rear and gathered
them like potatoes. Tens and fifties of them were flung into the gunny
sacks, and the sacks filled with tired, frightened, and disillusioned
frogs, with dripping, whimpering frogs. Some got away, of course, and
some had been saved in the pool. But never in frog history had such an
execution taken place. Frogs by the pound, by the fifty pounds. They
weren’t counted but there must have been six or seven hundred. Then
happily Mack tied up the necks of the sacks. They were soaking, dripping
wet and the air was cool. They had a short one in the grass before they
went back to the house so they wouldn’t catch cold.

It was doubtful whether the captain had ever had so much fun. He was
indebted to Mack and the boys. Later when the curtains caught fire and
were put out with the little towels, the captain told the boys not to
mind it. He felt it was an honor to have them burn his house clear down,
if they wanted to. “My wife is a wonderful woman,” he said in a kind of
peroration. “Most wonderful woman. Ought to of been a man. If she was a
man I wouldn’ of married her.” He laughed a long time over that and
repeated it three or four times and resolved to remember it so he could
tell it to a lot of other people. He filled a jug with whiskey and gave
it to Mack. He wanted to go to live with them in the Palace Flophouse.
He decided that his wife would like Mack and the boys if she only knew
them. Finally he went to sleep on the floor with his head among the
puppies. Mack and the boys poured themselves a short one and regarded
him seriously.

Mack said, “He give me that jug of whiskey, didn’t he? You heard him?”

“Sure he did,” said Eddie. “I heard him.”

“And he give me a pup?”

“Sure, pick of the litter. We all heard him. Why?”

“I never did roll a drunk and I ain’t gonna start now,” said Mack. “We
got to get out of here. He’s gonna wake up feelin’ lousy and it’s goin’
to be all our fault. I just don’t want to be here.” Mack glanced at the
burned curtains, at the floor glistening with whiskey and puppy dirt, at
the bacon grease that was coagulating on the stove front. He went to the
pups, looked them over carefully, felt bone and frame, looked in eyes
and regarded jaws, and he picked out a beautifully spotted bitch with a
liver-colored nose and a fine dark yellow eye. “Come on, darling,” he
said.

They blew out the lamp because of the danger of fire. It was just
turning dawn as they left the house.

“I don’t think I ever had such a fine trip,” said Mack. “But I got to
thinkin’ about his wife comin’ back and it gave me the shivers.” The pup
whined in his arms and he put it under his coat. “He’s a real nice
fella,” said Mack. “After you get him feelin’ easy, that is.” He strode
on toward the place where they had parked the Ford. “We shouldn’t go
forgettin’ we’re doin’ all this for Doc,” he said. “From the way things
are pannin’ out, it looks like Doc is a pretty lucky guy.”


                               CHAPTER 16

PROBABLY THE busiest time the girls of the Bear Flag ever had was the
March of the big sardine catch. It wasn’t only that the fish ran in
silvery billions and money ran almost as freely. A new regiment moved
into the Presidio and a new bunch of soldiers always shop around a good
deal before they settle down. Dora was short handed just at that time
too, for Eva Flanegan had gone to East St. Louis on a vacation, Phyllis
Mae had broken her leg getting out of the roller coaster in Santa Cruz,
and Elsie Doublebottom had made a novena and wasn’t much good for
anything else. The men from the sardine fleet, loaded with dough, were
in and out all afternoon. They sail at dark and fish all night so they
must play in the afternoon. In the evening the soldiers of the new
regiment came down and stood around playing the juke box and drinking
Coca-Cola and sizing up the girls for the time when they would be paid.
Dora was having trouble with her income tax, for she was entangled in
that curious enigma which said the business was illegal and then taxed
her for it. In addition to everything else there were the regulars—the
steady customers who had been coming down for years, the laborers from
the gravel pits, the riders from the ranches, the railroad men who came
in the front door, and the city officials and prominent business men who
came in the rear entrance back by the tracks and who had little chintz
sitting rooms assigned to them.

All in all it was a terrific month and right in the middle of it the
influenza epidemic had to break out. It came to the whole town. Mrs.
Talbot and her daughter of the San Carlos Hotel had it. Tom Work had it.
Benjamin Peabody and his wife had it. Excelentísima Maria Antonia Field
had it. The whole Gross family came down with it.

The doctors of Monterey—and there were enough of them to take care of
the ordinary diseases, accidents and neuroses—were running crazy. They
had more business than they could do among clients who if they didn’t
pay their bills, at least had the money to pay them. Cannery Row which
produces a tougher breed than the rest of the town was late in
contracting it, but finally it got them too. The schools were closed.
There wasn’t a house that hadn’t feverish children and sick parents. It
was not a deadly disease as it was in 1917 but with children it had a
tendency to go into the mastoids. The medical profession was very busy,
and besides, Cannery Row was not considered a very good financial risk.

Now Doc of the Western Biological Laboratory had no right to practice
medicine. It was not his fault that everyone in the Row came to him for
medical advice. Before he knew it he found himself running from shanty
to shanty taking temperatures, giving physics, borrowing and delivering
blankets and even taking food from house to house where mothers looked
at him with inflamed eyes from their beds, and thanked him and put the
full responsibility for their children’s recovery on him. When a case
got really out of hand he phoned a local doctor and sometimes one came
if it seemed to be an emergency. But to the families it was all
emergency. Doc didn’t get much sleep. He lived on beer and canned
sardines. In Lee Chong’s where he went to get beer he met Dora who was
there to buy a pair of nail clippers.

“You look done in,” Dora said.

“I am,” Doc admitted. “I haven’t had any sleep for about a week.”

“I know,” said Dora. “I hear it’s bad. Comes at a bad time too.”

“Well, we haven’t lost anybody yet,” said Doc. “But there are some awful
sick kids. The Ransel kids have all developed mastoiditis.”

“Is there anything I can do?” Dora asked.

Doc said, “You know there is. People get so scared and helpless. Take
the Ransels—they’re scared to death and they’re scared to be alone. If
you, or some of the girls, could just sit with them.”

Dora, who was soft as a mouse’s belly, could be as hard as carborundum.
She went back to the Bear Flag and organized it for service. It was a
bad time for her but she did it. The Greek cook made a ten-gallon
cauldron of strong soup and kept it full and kept it strong. The girls
tried to keep up their business but they went in shifts to sit with the
families, and they carried pots of soup when they went. Doc was in
almost constant demand. Dora consulted him and detailed the girls where
he suggested. And all the time the business at the Bear Flag was
booming. The juke box never stopped playing. The men of the fishing
fleet and the soldiers stood in line. And the girls did their work and
then they took their pots of soup and went to sit with the Ransels, with
the McCarthys, with the Ferrias. The girls slipped out the back door,
and sometimes staying with the sleeping children the girls dropped to
sleep in their chairs. They didn’t use makeup for work any more. They
didn’t have to. Dora herself said she could have used the total
membership of the old ladies’ home. It was the busiest time the girls at
the Bear Flag could remember. Everyone was glad when it was over.


                               CHAPTER 17

IN SPITE of his friendliness and his friends Doc was a lonely and a
set-apart man. Mack probably noticed it more than anybody. In a group,
Doc seemed always alone. When the lights were on and the curtains drawn,
and the Gregorian music played on the great phonograph, Mack used to
look down on the laboratory from the Palace Flophouse. He knew Doc had a
girl in there, but Mack used to get a dreadful feeling of loneliness out
of it. Even in the dear close contact with a girl Mack felt that Doc
would be lonely. Doc was a night crawler. The lights were on in the lab
all night and yet he seemed to be up in the daytime too. And the great
shrouds of music came out of the lab at any time of the day or night.
Sometimes when it was all dark and when it seemed that sleep had come at
last, the diamond-true child voices of the Sistine Choir would come from
the windows of the laboratory.

Doc had to keep up his collecting. He tried to get to the good tides
along the coast. The sea rocks and the beaches were his stock pile. He
knew where everything was when he wanted it. All the articles of his
trade were filed away on the coast, sea cradles here, octopi here, tube
worms in another place, sea pansies in another. He knew where to get
them but he could not go for them exactly when he wanted. For Nature
locked up the items and only released them occasionally. Doc had to know
not only the tides but when a particular low tide was good in a
particular place. When such a low tide occurred, he packed his
collecting tools in his car, he packed his jars, his bottles, his plates
and preservatives and he went to the beach or reef or rock ledge where
the animals he needed were stored.

Now he had an order for small octopi and the nearest place to get them
was the boulder-strewn inter-tidal zone at La Jolla between Los Angeles
and San Diego. It meant a five-hundred-mile drive each way and his
arrival had to coincide with the retreating waters.

The little octopi live among the boulders imbedded in sand. Being timid
and young, they prefer a bottom on which there are many caves and little
crevices and lumps of mud where they may hide from predators and protect
themselves from the waves. But on the same flat there are millions of
sea cradles. While filling a definite order for octopi, Doc could
replenish his stock of the cradles.

Low tide was 5:17 A.M. on a Thursday. If Doc left Monterey on Wednesday
morning he could be there easily in time for the tide on Thursday. He
would have taken someone with him for company but quite by accident
everyone was away or was busy. Mack and the boys were up Carmel Valley
collecting frogs. Three young women he knew and would have enjoyed as
companions had jobs and couldn’t get away in the middle of the week.
Henri the painter was occupied, for Holman’s Department Store had
employed not a flag-pole sitter but a flag-pole skater. On a tall mast
on top of the store he had a little round platform and there he was on
skates going around and around. He had been there three days and three
nights. He was out to set a new record for being on skates on a
platform. The previous record was 127 hours so he had some time to go.
Henri had taken up his post across the street at Red Williams’ gas
station. Henri was fascinated. He thought of doing a huge abstraction
called Substratum Dream of a Flag-pole Skater. Henri couldn’t leave town
while the skater was up there. He protested that there were philosophic
implications in flag-pole skating that no one had touched. Henri sat in
a chair, leaned back against the lattice which concealed the door of the
men’s toilet at Red Williams’. He kept his eye on the eyrie skating
platform and obviously he couldn’t go with Doc to La Jolla. Doc had to
go alone because the tide would not wait.

Early in the morning he got his things together. Personal things went in
a small satchel. Another satchel held instruments and syringes. Having
packed, he combed and trimmed his brown beard, saw that his pencils were
in his shirt pocket and his magnifying glass attached to his lapel. He
packed the trays, bottles, glass plates, preservatives, rubber boots and
a blanket into the back of his car. He worked through the pearly time,
washed three days’ dishes, put the garbage into the surf. He closed the
doors but did not lock them and by nine o’clock was on his way.

It took Doc longer to go places than other people. He didn’t drive fast
and he stopped and ate hamburgers very often. Driving up to Lighthouse
Avenue he waved at a dog that looked around and smiled at him. In
Monterey before he even started, he felt hungry and stopped at Herman’s
for a hamburger and beer. While he ate his sandwich and sipped his beer,
a bit of conversation came back to him. Blaisdell, the poet, had said to
him, “You love beer so much. I’ll bet some day you’ll go in and order a
beer milk shake.” It was a simple piece of foolery but it had bothered
Doc ever since. He wondered what a beer milk shake would taste like. The
idea gagged him but he couldn’t let it alone. It cropped up every time
he had a glass of beer. Would it curdle the milk? Would you add sugar?
It was like a shrimp ice cream. Once the thing got into your head you
couldn’t forget it. He finished his sandwich and paid Herman. He
purposely didn’t look at the milk shake machines lined up so shiny
against the back wall. If a man ordered a beer milk shake, he thought,
he’d better do it in a town where he wasn’t known. But then, a man with
a beard, ordering a beer milk shake in a town where he wasn’t
known—they might call the police. A man with a beard was always a
little suspect anyway. You couldn’t say you wore a beard because you
liked a beard. People didn’t like you for telling the truth. You had to
say you had a scar so you couldn’t shave. Once when Doc was at the
University of Chicago he had love trouble and he had worked too hard. He
thought it would be nice to take a very long walk. He put on a little
knapsack and he walked through Indiana and Kentucky and North Carolina
and Georgia clear to Florida. He walked among farmers and mountain
people, among the swamp people and fishermen. And everywhere people
asked him why he was walking through the country.

Because he loved true things he tried to explain. He said he was nervous
and besides he wanted to see the country, smell the ground and look at
grass and birds and trees, to savor the country, and there was no other
way to do it save on foot. And people didn’t like him for telling the
truth. They scowled, or shook and tapped their heads, they laughed as
though they knew it was a lie and they appreciated a liar. And some,
afraid for their daughters or their pigs, told him to move on, to get
going, just not to stop near their place if he knew what was good for
him.

And so he stopped trying to tell the truth. He said he was doing it on a
bet—that he stood to win a hundred dollars. Everyone liked him then and
believed him. They asked him in to dinner and gave him a bed and they
put lunches up for him and wished him good luck and thought he was a
hell of a fine fellow. Doc still loved true things but he knew it was
not a general love and it could be a very dangerous mistress.

Doc didn’t stop in Salinas for a hamburger. But he stopped in Gonzales,
in King City, and in Paso Robles. He had hamburger and beer at Santa
Maria—two in Santa Maria because it was a long pull from there to Santa
Barbara. In Santa Barbara he had soup, lettuce and string bean salad,
pot roast and mashed potatoes, pineapple pie and blue cheese and coffee,
and after that he filled the gas tank and went to the toilet. While the
service station checked his oil and tires, Doc washed his face and
combed his beard and when he came back to the car a number of potential
hitchhikers were waiting.

“Going south, Mister?”

Doc traveled on the highways a good deal. He was an old hand. You have
to pick your hitchhikers very carefully. It’s best to get an experienced
one, for he relapses into silence. But the new ones try to pay for their
ride by being interesting. Doc had had a leg talked off by some of
these. Then after you have made up your mind about the one you want to
take, you protect yourself by saying you aren’t going far. If your man
turns out too much for you, you can drop him. On the other hand, you may
be just lucky and get a man very much worth knowing. Doc made a quick
survey of the line and chose his company, a thin-faced salesman-like man
in a blue suit. He had deep lines beside his mouth and dark brooding
eyes.

He looked at Doc with dislike. “Going south, Mister?”

“Yes,” said Doc, “a little way.”

“Mind taking me along?”

“Get in!” said Doc.

When they got to Ventura it was pretty soon after the heavy dinner so
Doc only stopped for beer. The hitchhiker hadn’t spoken once. Doc pulled
up at a roadside stand.

“Want some beer?”

“No,” said the hitchhiker. “And I don’t mind saying I think it’s not a
very good idea to drive under the influence of alcohol. It’s none of my
business what you do with your own life but in this case you’ve got an
automobile and that can be a murderous weapon in the hands of a drunken
driver.”

At the beginning Doc had been slightly startled. “Get out of the car,”
he said softly.

“What?”

“I’m going to punch you in the nose,” said Doc. “If you aren’t out of
this car before I count ten— One—two—three—”

The man fumbled at the door catch and backed hurriedly out of the car.
But once outside he howled, “I’m going to find an officer. I’m going to
have you arrested.”

Doc opened the box on the dashboard and took out a monkey wrench. His
guest saw the gesture and walked hurriedly away.

Doc walked angrily to the counter of the stand.

The waitress, a blonde beauty with just the hint of a goiter, smiled at
him. “What’ll it be?”

“Beer milk shake,” said Doc.

“What?”

Well here it was and what the hell. Might just as well get it over with
now as some time later.

The blonde asked, “Are you kidding?”

Doc knew wearily that he couldn’t explain, couldn’t tell the truth.
“I’ve got a bladder complaint,” he said. “Bipalychaetorsonectomy the
doctors call it. I’m supposed to drink a _beer milk shake_. Doctor’s
orders.”

The blonde smiled reassuringly. “Oh! I thought you was kidding,” she
said archly. “You tell me how to make it. I didn’t know you was sick.”

“Very sick,” said Doc, “and due to be sicker. Put in some milk, and add
half a bottle of beer. Give me the other half in a glass—no sugar in
the milk shake.” When she served it, he tasted it wryly. And it wasn’t
so bad—it just tasted like stale beer and milk.

“It sounds awful,” said the blonde.

“It’s not so bad when you get used to it,” said Doc. “I’ve been drinking
it for seventeen years.”


                               CHAPTER 18

DOC HAD driven slowly. It was late afternoon when he stopped in Ventura,
so late in fact that when he stopped in Carpenteria he only had a cheese
sandwich and went to the toilet. Besides he intended to get a good
dinner in Los Angeles and it was dark when he got there. He drove on
through and stopped at a big Chicken-in-the-Rough place he knew about.
And there he had fried chicken, julienne potatoes, hot biscuits and
honey, and a piece of pineapple pie and blue cheese. And here he filled
his thermos bottle with hot coffee, had them make up six ham sandwiches
and bought two quarts of beer for breakfast.

It was not so interesting driving at night. No dogs to see, only the
highway lighted with his headlights. Doc speeded up to finish the trip.
It was about two o’clock when he got to La Jolla. He drove through the
town and down to the cliff below which his tidal flat lay. There he
stopped the car, ate a sandwich, drank some beer, turned out the lights
and curled up in the seat to sleep.

He didn’t need a clock. He had been working in a tidal pattern so long
that he could feel a tide change in his sleep. In the dawn he awakened,
looked out through the windshield and saw that the water was already
retreating down the bouldery flat. He drank some hot coffee, ate three
sandwiches and had a quart of beer.

The tide goes out imperceptibly. The boulders show and seem to rise up
and the ocean recedes leaving little pools, leaving wet weed and moss
and sponge, iridescence and brown and blue and China red. On the bottoms
lie the incredible refuse of the sea, shells broken and chipped and bits
of skeleton, claws, the whole sea bottom a fantastic cemetery on which
the living scamper and scramble.

Doc pulled on his rubber boots and set his rain hat fussily. He took his
buckets and jars and his crowbar and put his sandwiches in one pocket
and his thermos bottle in another pocket and he went down the cliff to
the tidal flat. Then he worked down the flat after the retreating sea.
He turned over the boulders with his crowbar and now and then his hand
darted quickly into the standing water and brought out a little angry
squirming octopus which blushed with rage and spat ink on his hand. Then
he dropped it into a jar of sea water with the others and usually the
newcomer was so angry that it attacked its fellows.

It was good hunting that day. He got twenty-two little octopi. And he
picked off several hundred sea cradles and put them in his wooden
bucket. As the tide moved out he followed it while the morning came and
the sun rose. The flat extended out two hundred yards and then there was
a line of heavy weed-crusted rocks before it dropped off to deep water.
Doc worked out to the barrier edge. He had about what he wanted now and
the rest of the time he looked under stones, leaned down and peered into
the tide pools with their brilliant mosaics and their scuttling,
bubbling life. And he came at last to the outer barrier where the long
leathery brown algae hung down into the water. Red starfish clustered on
the rocks and the sea pulsed up and down against the barrier waiting to
get in again. Between two weeded rocks on the barrier Doc saw a flash of
white under water and then the floating weed covered it. He climbed to
the place over the slippery rocks, held himself firmly, and gently
reached down and parted the brown algae. Then he grew rigid. A girl’s
face looked up at him, a pretty, pale face with dark hair. The eyes were
open and clear and the face was firm and the hair washed gently about
her head. The body was out of sight, caught in the crevice. The lips
were slightly parted and the teeth showed and on the face was only
comfort and rest. Just under water it was and the clear water made it
very beautiful. It seemed to Doc that he looked at it for many minutes,
and the face burned into his picture memory.

Very slowly he raised his hand and let the brown weed float back and
cover the face. Doc’s heart pounded deeply and his throat felt tight. He
picked up his bucket and his jars and his crowbar and went slowly over
the slippery rocks back toward the beach.

And the girl’s face went ahead of him. He sat down on the beach in the
coarse dry sand and pulled off his boots. In the jar the little octopi
were huddled up each keeping as far as possible from the others. Music
sounded in Doc’s ears, a high thin piercingly sweet flute carrying a
melody he could never remember, and against this, a pounding surf-like
wood-wind section. The flute went up into regions beyond the hearing
range and even there it carried its unbelievable melody. Goose pimples
came out on Doc’s arms. He shivered and his eyes were wet the way they
get in the focus of great beauty. The girl’s eyes had been gray and
clear and the dark hair floated, drifted lightly over the face. The
picture was set for all time. He sat there while the first little spout
of water came over the reef bringing the returning tide. He sat there
hearing the music while the sea crept in again over the bouldery flat.
His hand tapped out the rhythm, and the terrifying flute played in his
brain. The eyes were gray and the mouth smiled a little or seemed to
catch its breath in ecstasy.

A voice seemed to awaken him. A man stood over him. “Been fishing?”

“No, collecting.”

“Well—what are them things?”

“Baby octopi.”

“You mean devilfish? I didn’t know there was any there. I’ve lived here
all my life.”

“You’ve got to look for them,” said Doc listlessly.

“Say,” said the man, “aren’t you feeling well? You look sick.”

The flute climbed again and plucked cellos sounded below and the sea
crept in and in toward the beach. Doc shook off the music, shook off the
face, shook the chill out of his body. “Is there a police station near?”

“Up in town. Why, what’s wrong?”

“There’s a body out on the reef.”

“Where?”

“Right out there—wedged between two rocks. A girl.”

“Say—” said the man. “You get a bounty for finding a body. I forget how
much.”

Doc stood up and gathered his equipment. “Will you report it? I’m not
feeling well.”

“Give you a shock, did it?—bad? Rotten or eat up?”

Doc turned away. “You take the bounty,” he said. “I don’t want it.” He
started toward the car. Only the tiniest piping of the flute sounded in
his head.


                               CHAPTER 19

PROBABLY NOTHING in the way of promotion Holman’s Department Store ever
did attracted so much favorable comment as the engagement of the
flag-pole skater. Day after day, there he was up on his little round
platform skating around and around and at night he could be seen up
there too, dark against the sky so that everybody knew he didn’t come
down. It was generally agreed, however, that a steel rod came up through
the center of the platform at night and he strapped himself to it. But
he didn’t sit down and no one minded the steel rod. People came from
Jamesburg to see him and from down the coast as far as Grimes Point.
Salinas people came over in droves and the Farmers Mercantile of that
town put in a bid for the next appearance when the skater could attempt
to break his own record and thus give the new world’s record to Salinas.
Since there weren’t many flag-pole skaters and since this one was by far
the best, he had for the last year gone about breaking his own world’s
record.

Holman’s was delighted about the venture. They had a white sale, a
remnant sale, an aluminum sale, and a crockery sale all going at the
same time. Crowds of people stood in the street watching the lone man on
his platform.

His second day up, he sent down word that someone was shooting at him
with an air gun. The display department used its head. It figured the
angles and located the offender. It was old Doctor Merrivale hiding
behind the curtains of his office, plugging away with a Daisy air rifle.
They didn’t denounce him and he promised to stop. He was very prominent
in the Masonic Lodge.

Henri the painter kept his chair at Red Williams’ service station. He
worked out every possible philosophic approach to the situation and came
to the conclusion that he would have to build a platform at home and try
it himself. Everyone in the town was more or less affected by the
skater. Trade fell off out of sight of him and got better the nearer you
came to Holman’s. Mack and the boys went up and looked for a moment and
then went back to the Palace. They couldn’t see that it made much sense.

Holman’s set up a double bed in their window. When the skater broke the
world’s record he was going to come down and sleep right in the window
without taking off his skates. The trade name of the mattress was on a
little card at the foot of the bed.

Now in the whole town there was interest and discussion about this
sporting event, but the most interesting question of all and the one
that bothered the whole town was never spoken of. No one mentioned it
and yet it was there haunting everyone. Mrs. Trolat wondered about it as
she came out of the Scotch bakery with a bag of sweet buns. Mr. Hall in
men’s furnishings wondered about it. The three Willoughby girls giggled
whenever they thought of it. But no one had the courage to bring it into
the open.

Richard Frost, a high-strung and brilliant young man, worried about it
more than anyone else. It haunted him. Wednesday night he worried and
Thursday night he fidgeted. Friday night he got drunk and had a fight
with his wife. She cried for a while and then pretended to be asleep.
She heard him slip from bed and go into the kitchen. He was getting
another drink. And then she heard him dress quietly and go out. She
cried some more then. It was very late. Mrs. Frost was sure he was going
down to Dora’s Bear Flag.

Richard walked sturdily down the hill through the pines until he came to
Lighthouse Avenue. He turned left and went up toward Holman’s. He had
the bottle in his pocket and just before he came to the store he took
one more slug of it. The street lights were turned down low. The town
was deserted. Not a soul moved. Richard stood in the middle of the
street and looked up.

Dimly on top of the high mast he could see the lonely figure of the
skater. He took another drink. He cupped his hand and called huskily,
“Hey!” There was no answer. “Hey!” he called louder and looked around to
see if the cops had come out of their place beside the bank.

Down from the sky came a surly reply: “What do you want?”

Richard cupped his hands again. “How—how do you—go to the toilet?”

“I’ve got a can up here,” said the voice.

Richard turned and walked back the way he had come. He walked along
Lighthouse and up through the pines and he came to his house and let
himself in. As he undressed he knew his wife was awake. She bubbled a
little when she was asleep. He got into bed and she made room for him.

“He’s got a can up there,” Richard said.


                               CHAPTER 20

IN MID-MORNING the Model T truck rolled triumphantly home to Cannery Row
and hopped the gutter and creaked up through the weeds to its place
behind Lee Chong’s. The boys blocked up the front wheels, drained what
gasoline was left into a five-gallon can, took their frogs and went
wearily home to the Palace Flophouse. Then Mack made a ceremonious visit
to Lee Chong while the boys got a fire going in the big stove. Mack
thanked Lee with dignity for lending the truck. He spoke of the great
success of the trip, of the hundreds of frogs taken. Lee smiled shyly
and waited for the inevitable.

“We’re in the chips,” Mack said enthusiastically. “Doc pays us a nickel
a frog and we got about a thousand.”

Lee nodded. The price was standard. Everybody knew that.

“Doc’s away,” said Mack. “Jesus, is he gonna be happy when he sees all
them frogs.”

Lee nodded again. He knew Doc was away and he also knew where the
conversation was going.

“Say, by the way,” said Mack as though he had just thought of it. “We’re
a little bit short right now—” He managed to make it sound like a very
unusual situation.

“No whiskey,” said Lee Chong and he smiled.

Mack was outraged. “What would we want whiskey for? Why we got a gallon
of the finest whiskey you ever laid a lip over—a whole full God damned
running over gallon. By the way,” he continued, “I and the boys would
like to have you just step up for a snort with us. They told me to ask
you.”

In spite of himself Lee smiled with pleasure. They wouldn’t offer it if
they didn’t have it.

“No,” said Mack, “I’ll lay it on the line. I and the boys are pretty
short and we’re pretty hungry. You know the price of frogs is twenty for
a buck. Now Doc is away and we’re hungry. So what we thought is this. We
don’t want to see you lose nothing so we’ll make over to you twenty-five
frogs for a buck. You got a five-frog profit there and nobody loses his
shirt.”

“No,” said Lee. “No money.”

“Well, hell, Lee, all we need is a little groceries. I’ll tell you
what—we want to give Doc a little party when he gets back. We got
plenty of liquor but we’d like to get maybe some steaks, and stuff like
that. He’s such a nice guy. Hell, when your wife had that bad tooth, who
give her the laudanum?”

Mack had him. Lee was indebted to Doc—deeply indebted. What Lee was
having trouble comprehending was how his indebtedness to Doc made it
necessary that he give credit to Mack.

“We don’t want you to have like a mortgage on frogs,” Mack went on. “We
will actually deliver right into your hands twenty-five frogs for every
buck of groceries you let us have and you can come to the party too.”

Lee’s mind nosed over the proposition like a mouse in a cheese cupboard.
He could find nothing wrong with it. The whole thing was legitimate.
Frogs _were_ cash as far as Doc was concerned, the price was standard
and Lee had a double profit. He had his five-frog margin and also he had
the grocery mark-up. The whole thing hinged on whether they actually had
any frogs.

“We go see flog,” Lee said at last.

In front of the Palace he had a drink of the whiskey, inspected the damp
sacks of frogs, and agreed to the transaction. He stipulated, however,
that he would take no dead frogs. Now Mack counted fifty frogs into a
can and walked back to the grocery with Lee and got two dollars’ worth
of bacon and eggs and bread.

Lee, anticipating a brisk business, brought a big packing case out and
put it into the vegetable department. He emptied the fifty frogs into it
and covered it with a wet gunny sack to keep his charges happy.

And business was brisk. Eddie sauntered down and bought two frogs’ worth
of Bull Durham. Jones was outraged a little later when the price of
Coca-Cola went up from one to two frogs. In fact bitterness arose as the
day wore on and prices went up. Steak, for instance—the very best steak
shouldn’t have been more than ten frogs a pound but Lee set it at twelve
and a half. Canned peaches were sky high, eight frogs for a No. 2 can.
Lee had a stranglehold on the consumers. He was pretty sure that the
Thrift Market or Holman’s would not approve of this new monetary system.
If the boys wanted steak, they knew they had to pay Lee’s prices.
Feeling ran high when Hazel, who had coveted a pair of yellow silk arm
bands for a long time, was told that if he didn’t want to pay
thirty-five frogs for them he could go somewhere else. The poison of
greed was already creeping into the innocent and laudable merchandising
agreement. Bitterness was piling up. But in Lee’s packing case the frogs
were piling up too.

Financial bitterness could not eat too deeply into Mack and the boys,
for they were not mercantile men. They did not measure their joy in
goods sold, their egos in bank balances, nor their loves in what they
cost. While they were mildly irritated that Lee was taking them for an
economic ride or perhaps hop, two dollars’ worth of bacon and eggs was
in their stomachs lying right on top of a fine slug of whiskey and right
on top of the breakfast was another slug of whiskey. And they sat in
their own chairs in their own house and watched Darling learning to
drink canned milk out of a sardine can. Darling was and was destined to
remain a very happy dog, for in the group of five men there were five
distinct theories of dog training, theories which clashed so that
Darling never got any training at all. From the first she was a
precocious bitch. She slept on the bed of the man who had given her the
last bribe. They really stole for her sometimes. They wooed her away
from one another. Occasionally all five agreed that things had to change
and that Darling must be disciplined, but in the discussion of method
the intention invariably drifted away. They were in love with her. They
found the little puddles she left on the floor charming. They bored all
their acquaintances with her cuteness and they would have killed her
with food if in the end she hadn’t had better sense than they.

Jones made her a bed in the bottom of the grandfather clock but Darling
never used it. She slept with one or another of them as the fancy moved
her. She chewed the blankets, tore the mattresses, sprayed the feathers
out of the pillows. She coquetted and played her owners against one
another. They thought she was wonderful. Mack intended to teach her
tricks and go in vaudeville and he didn’t even housebreak her.

They sat in the afternoon, smoking, digesting, considering, and now and
then having a delicate drink from the jug. And each time they warned
that they must not take too much, for it was to be for Doc. They must
not forget that for a minute.

“What time you figure he’ll be back?” Eddie asked.

“Usually gets in about eight or nine o’clock,” said Mack. “Now we got to
figure when we’re going to give it. I think we ought to give it
tonight.”

“Sure,” the others agreed.

“Maybe he might be tired,” Hazel suggested. “That’s a long drive.”

“Hell,” said Jones, “nothing rests you like a good party. I’ve been so
dog tired my pants was draggin’ and then I’ve went to a party and felt
fine.”

“We got to do some real thinkin’,” said Mack. “Where we going to give
it—here?”

“Well, Doc, he likes his music. He’s always got his phonograph going at
a party. Maybe he’d be more happy if we give it over at his place.”

“You got something there,” said Mack. “But I figure it ought to be like
a surprise party. And how we going to make like it’s a party and not
just us bringin’ over a jug of whiskey?”

“How about decorations?” Hughie suggested. “Like Fourth of July or
Halloween.”

Mack’s eyes looked off into space and his lips were parted. He could see
it all. “Hughie,” he said, “I think you got something there. I never
would of thought you could do it, but by God you really rang a duck that
time.” His voice grew mellow and his eyes looked into the future. “I can
just see it,” he said. “Doc comes home. He’s tired. He drives up. The
place is all lit up. He thinks somebody’s broke in. He goes up the
stairs and by God the place has got the hell decorated out of it.
There’s crepe paper and there’s favors and a big cake. Jesus, he’d know
it was a party then. And it wouldn’t be no little mouse fart party
neither. And we’re kind of hiding so for a minute he don’t know who done
it. And then we come out yelling. Can’t you see his face? By God,
Hughie, I don’t know how you thought of it.”

Hughie blushed. His conception had been much more conservative, based in
fact on the New Year’s party at La Ida, but if it was going to be like
that why Hughie was willing to take credit. “I just thought it would be
nice,” he said.

“Well, it’s a pretty nice thing,” said Mack, “and I don’t mind saying
when the surprise kind of wears off, I’m going to tell Doc who thought
it up.” They leaned back and considered the thing. And in their minds
the decorated laboratory looked like the conservatory at the Hotel del
Monte. They had a couple more drinks, just to savor the plan.

Lee Chong kept a very remarkable store. For instance, most stores buy
yellow and black crepe paper and black paper cats, masks and
papier-mâché pumpkins in October. There is a brisk business for
Halloween and then these items disappear. Maybe they are sold or thrown
out, but you can’t buy them say in June. The same is true of Fourth of
July equipment, flags and bunting and skyrockets. Where are they in
January? Gone—no one knows where. This was not Lee Chong’s way. You
could buy Valentines in November at Lee Chong’s, shamrocks, hatchets and
paper cherry trees in August. He had firecrackers he had laid up in
1920. One of the mysteries was where he kept his stock since his was not
a very large store. He had bathing suits he had bought when long skirts
and black stockings and head bandanas were in style. He had bicycle
clips and tatting shuttles and Mah Jong sets. He had badges that said
“Remember the Maine” and felt pennants commemorating “Fighting Bob.” He
had mementos of the Panama Pacific International Exposition of
1915—little towers of jewels. And there was one other unorthodoxy in
Lee’s way of doing business. He never had a sale, never reduced a price
and never remaindered. An article that cost thirty cents in 1912 still
was thirty cents although mice and moths might seem to some to have
reduced its value. But there was no question about it. If you wanted to
decorate a laboratory in a general way, not being specific about the
season but giving the impression of a cross between Saturnalia and a
pageant of the Flags of all Nations, Lee Chong’s was the place to go for
your stuff.

Mack and the boys knew that, but Mack said, “Where we going to get a big
cake? Lee hasn’t got nothing but them little bakery cakes.”

Hughie had been so successful before he tried again. “Why’n’t Eddie bake
a cake?” he suggested. “Eddie used to be fry cook at the San Carlos for
a while.”

The instant enthusiasm for the idea drove from Eddie’s brain the
admission that he had never baked a cake.

Mack put it on a sentimental basis besides. “It would mean more to Doc,”
he said. “It wouldn’t be like no God damned old soggy bought cake. It
would have some heart in it.”

As the afternoon and the whiskey went down the enthusiasm rose. There
were endless trips to Lee Chong’s. The frogs were gone from one sack and
Lee’s packing case was getting crowded. By six o’clock they had finished
the gallon of whiskey and were buying half pints of Old Tennis Shoes at
fifteen frogs a crack, but the pile of decorating materials was heaped
on the floor of the Palace Flophouse—miles of crepe paper commemorating
every holiday in vogue and some that had been abandoned.

Eddie watched his stove like a mother hen. He was baking a cake in the
wash basin. The recipe was guaranteed not to fail by the company which
made the shortening. But from the first the cake had acted strangely.
When the batter was completed it writhed and panted as though animals
were squirming and crawling inside it. Once in the oven it put up a
bubble like a baseball which grew tight and shiny and then collapsed
with a hissing sound. This left such a crater that Eddie made a new
batch of batter and filled in the hole. And now the cake was behaving
very curiously for while the bottom was burning and sending out a black
smoke the top was rising and falling glueyly with a series of little
explosions.

When Eddie finally put it out to cool, it looked like one of Bel Geddes’
miniatures of a battlefield on a lava bed.

This cake was not fortunate, for while the boys were decorating the
laboratory Darling ate what she could of it, was sick in it, and finally
curled up in its still warm dough and went to sleep.

But Mack and the boys had taken the crepe paper, the masks, the
broomsticks and paper pumpkins, the red, white, and blue bunting, and
moved over the lot and across the street to the laboratory. They
disposed of the last of the frogs for a quart of Old Tennis Shoes and
two gallons of 49-cent wine.

“Doc is very fond of wine,” said Mack. “I think he likes it even better
than whiskey.”

Doc never locked the laboratory. He went on the theory that anyone who
really wanted to break in could easily do it, that people were
essentially honest and that finally, there wasn’t much the average
person would want to steal there anyway. The valuable things were books
and records, surgical instruments and optical glass and such things that
a practical working burglar wouldn’t look at twice. His theory had been
sound as far as burglars, snatch thieves, and kleptomaniacs were
concerned, but it had been completely ineffective regarding his friends.
Books were often “borrowed.” No can of beans ever survived his absence
and on several occasions, returning late, he had found guests in his
bed.

The boys piled the decorations in the anteroom and then Mack stopped
them. “What’s going to make Doc happiest?” he asked.

“The party!” said Hazel.

“No,” said Mack.

“The decorations?” Hughie suggested. He felt responsible for the
decorations.

“No,” said Mack, “the frogs. That’s going to make him feel best of all.
And maybe by the time he gets here, Lee Chong might be closed and he
can’t even see his frogs until tomorrow. No, sir,” Mack cried. “Them
frogs ought to be right here, right in the middle of the room with a
piece of bunting on it and a sign that says, ‘Welcome Home, Doc.’”

The committee which visited Lee met with stern opposition. All sorts of
possibilities suggested themselves to his suspicious brain. It was
explained that he was going to be at the party so he could watch his
property, that no one questioned that they were his. Mack wrote out a
paper transferring the frogs to Lee in case there should be any
question.

When his protests weakened a little they carried the packing case over
to the laboratory, tacked red, white, and blue bunting over it, lettered
the big sign with iodine on a card, and they started the decorating from
there. They had finished the whiskey by now and they really felt in a
party mood. They criss-crossed the crepe paper, and put the pumpkins up.
Passers-by in the street joined the party and rushed over to Lee’s to
get more to drink. Lee Chong joined the party for a while but his
stomach was notoriously weak and he got sick and had to go home. At
eleven o’clock they fried the steaks and ate them. Someone digging
through the records found an album of Count Basie and the great
phonograph roared out. The noise could be heard from the boat works to
La Ida. A group of customers from the Bear Flag mistook Western
Biological for a rival house and charged up the stairs whooping with
joy. They were evicted by the outraged hosts but only after a long,
happy, and bloody battle that took out the front door and broke two
windows. The crashing of jars was unpleasant. Hazel going through the
kitchen to the toilet tipped the frying pan of hot grease on himself and
the floor and was badly burned.

At one-thirty a drunk wandered in and passed a remark which was
considered insulting to Doc. Mack hit him a clip which is still
remembered and discussed. The man rose off his feet, described a small
arc, and crashed through the packing case in among the frogs. Someone
trying to change a record dropped the tone down and broke the crystal.

No one has studied the psychology of a dying party. It may be raging,
howling, boiling, and then a fever sets in and a little silence and then
quickly quickly it is gone, the guests go home or go to sleep or wander
away to some other affair and they leave a dead body.

The lights blazed in the laboratory. The front door hung sideways by one
hinge. The floor was littered with broken glass. Phonograph records,
some broken, some only nicked, were strewn about. The plates with pieces
of steak ends and coagulating grease were on the floor, on top of the
bookcases, under the bed. Whiskey glasses lay sadly on their sides.
Someone trying to climb the bookcases had pulled out a whole section of
books and spilled them in broken-backed confusion on the floor. And it
was empty, it was over.

Through the broken end of the packing case a frog hopped and sat feeling
the air for danger and then another joined him. They could smell the
fine damp cool air coming in the door and in through the broken windows.
One of them sat on the fallen card which said “Welcome Home, Doc.” And
then the two hopped timidly toward the door.

For quite a while a little river of frogs hopped down the steps, a
swirling, moving river. For quite a while Cannery Row crawled with
frogs—was overrun with frogs. A taxi which brought a very late customer
to the Bear Flag squashed five frogs in the street. But well before dawn
they had all gone. Some found the sewer and some worked their way up the
hill to the reservoir and some went into culverts and some only hid
among the weeds in the vacant lot.

And the lights blazed in the quiet empty laboratory.


                               CHAPTER 21

IN THE back room of the laboratory the white rats in their cages ran and
skittered and squeaked. In the corner of a separate cage a mother rat
lay over her litter of blind naked children and let them suckle and the
mother stared about nervously and fiercely.

In the rattlesnake cage the snakes lay with their chins resting on their
own coils and they stared straight ahead out of their scowling dusty
black eyes. In another cage a Gila monster with a skin like a beaded bag
reared slowly up and clawed heavily and sluggishly at the wire. The
anemones in the aquaria blossomed open, with green and purple tentacles
and pale green stomachs. The little sea water pump whirred softly and
the needles of driven water hissed into the tanks forcing lines of
bubbles under the surface.

It was the hour of the pearl. Lee Chong brought his garbage cans out to
the curb. The bouncer stood on the porch of the Bear Flag and scratched
his stomach. Sam Malloy crawled out of the boiler and sat on his wood
block and looked at the lightening east. Over on the rocks near Hopkins
Marine Station the sea lions barked monotonously. The old Chinaman came
up out of the sea with his dripping basket and flip-flapped up the hill.

Then a car turned into Cannery Row and Doc drove up to the front of the
laboratory. His eyes were red rimmed with fatigue. He moved slowly with
tiredness. When the car had stopped, he sat still for a moment to let
the road jumps get out of his nerves. Then he climbed out of the car. At
his step on the stairs, the rattlesnakes ran out their tongues and
listened with their waving forked tongues. The rats scampered madly
about the cages. Doc climbed the stairs. He looked in wonder at the
sagging door and at the broken window. The weariness seemed to go out of
him. He stepped quickly inside. Then he went quickly from room to room,
stepping around the broken glass. He bent down quickly and picked up a
smashed phonograph record and looked at its title.

In the kitchen the spilled grease had turned white on the floor. Doc’s
eyes flamed red with anger. He sat down on his couch and his head
settled between his shoulders and his body weaved a little in his rage.
Suddenly he jumped up and turned on the power in his great phonograph.
He put on a record and put down the arm. Only a hissing roar came from
the loudspeaker. He lifted the arm, stopped the turntable, and sat down
on the couch again.

On the stairs there were bumbling uncertain footsteps and through the
door came Mack. His face was red. He stood uncertainly in the middle of
the room. “Doc—” he said—“I and the boys—”

For the moment Doc hadn’t seemed to see him. Now he leaped to his feet.
Mack shuffled backward. “Did you do this?”

“Well, I and the boys—” Doc’s small hard fist whipped out and splashed
against Mack’s mouth. Doc’s eyes shone with a red animal rage. Mack sat
down heavily on the floor. Doc’s fist was hard and sharp. Mack’s lips
were split against his teeth and one front tooth bent sharply inward.
“Get up!” said Doc.

Mack lumbered to his feet. His hands were at his sides. Doc hit him
again, a cold calculated punishing punch in the mouth. The blood spurted
from Mack’s lips and ran down his chin. He tried to lick his lips.

“Put up your hands. Fight, you son of a bitch,” Doc cried, and he hit
him again and heard the crunch of breaking teeth.

Mack’s head jolted but he was braced now so he wouldn’t fall. And his
hands stayed at his sides. “Go ahead, Doc,” he said thickly through his
broken lips. “I got it coming.”

Doc’s shoulders sagged with defeat. “You son of a bitch,” he said
bitterly. “Oh you dirty son of a bitch.” He sat down on the couch and
looked at his cut knuckles.

Mack sat down in a chair and looked at him. Mack’s eyes were wide and
full of pain. He didn’t even wipe away the blood that flowed down his
chin. In Doc’s head the monotonal opening of Monteverdi’s _Hor ch’ el
Ciel e la Terra_ began to form, the infinitely sad and resigned mourning
of Petrarch for Laura. Doc saw Mack’s broken mouth through the music,
the music that was in his head and in the air. Mack sat perfectly still,
almost as though he could hear the music too. Doc glanced at the place
where the Monteverdi album was and then he remembered that the
phonograph was broken.

He got to his feet. “Go wash your face,” he said and he went out and
down the stairs and across the street to Lee Chong’s. Lee wouldn’t look
at him as he got two quarts of beer out of the icebox. He took the money
without saying anything. Doc walked back across the street.

Mack was in the toilet cleaning his bloody face with wet paper towels.
Doc opened a bottle and poured gently into a glass, holding it at an
angle so that very little collar rose to the top. He filled a second
tall glass and carried the two into the front room. Mack came back
dabbing at his mouth with wet towelling. Doc indicated the beer with his
head. Now Mack opened his throat and poured down half the glass without
swallowing. He sighed explosively and stared into the beer. Doc had
already finished his glass. He brought the bottle in and filled both
glasses again. He sat down on his couch.

“What happened?” he asked.

Mack looked at the floor and a drop of blood fell from his lips into his
beer. He mopped his split lips again. “I and the boys wanted to give you
a party. We thought you’d be home last night.”

Doc nodded his head. “I see.”

“She got out of hand,” said Mack. “It don’t do no good to say I’m sorry.
I been sorry all my life. This ain’t no new thing. It’s always like
this.” He swallowed deeply from his glass. “I had a wife,” Mack said.
“Same thing. Ever’thing I done turned sour. She couldn’t stand it any
more. If I done a good thing it got poisoned up some way. If I give her
a present they was something wrong with it. She only got hurt from me.
She couldn’t stand it no more. Same thing ever’ place ’til I just got to
clowning. I don’t do nothin’ but clown no more. Try to make the boys
laugh.”

Doc nodded again. The music was sounding in his head again, complaint
and resignation all in one. “I know,” he said.

“I was glad when you hit me,” Mack went on. “I thought to myself—‘Maybe
this will teach me. Maybe I’ll remember this.’ But, hell, I won’t
remember nothin’. I won’t learn nothin’. Doc,” Mack cried, “the way I
seen it, we was all happy and havin’ a good time. You was glad because
we was givin’ you a party. And we was glad. The way I seen it, it was a
good party.” He waved his hand at the wreckage on the floor. “Same thing
when I was married. I’d think her out and then—but it never come off
that way.”

“I know,” said Doc. He opened the second quart of beer and poured the
glasses full.

“Doc,” said Mack, “I and the boys will clean up here—and we’ll pay for
the stuff that’s broke. If it takes us five years we’ll pay for it.”

Doc shook his head slowly and wiped the beer foam from his mustache.
“No,” he said, “I’ll clean it up. I know where everything goes.”

“We’ll pay for it, Doc.”

“No you won’t, Mack,” said Doc. “You’ll think about it and it’ll worry
you for quite a long time, but you won’t pay for it. There’s maybe three
hundred dollars in broken museum glass. Don’t say you’ll pay for it.
That will just keep you uneasy. It might be two or three years before
you forgot about it and felt entirely easy again. And you wouldn’t pay
it anyway.”

“I guess you’re right,” said Mack. “God damn it, I _know_ you’re right.
What can we do?”

“I’m over it,” said Doc. “Those socks in the mouth got it out of my
system. Let’s forget it.”

Mack finished his beer and stood up. “So long, Doc,” he said.

“So long. Say, Mack—what happened to your wife?”

“I don’t know,” said Mack. “She went away.” He walked clumsily down the
stairs and crossed over and walked up the lot and up the chicken walk to
the Palace Flophouse. Doc watched his progress through the window. And
then wearily he got a broom from behind the water heater. It took him
all day to clean up the mess.


                               CHAPTER 22

HENRI THE painter was not French and his name was not Henri. Also he was
not really a painter. Henri had so steeped himself in stories of the
Left Bank in Paris that he lived there although he had never been there.
Feverishly he followed in periodicals the Dadaist movements and schisms,
the strangely feminine jealousies and religiousness, the obscurantisms
of the forming and breaking schools. Regularly he revolted against
outworn techniques and materials. One season he threw out perspective.
Another year he abandoned red, even as the mother of purple. Finally he
gave up paint entirely. It is not known whether Henri was a good painter
or not for he threw himself so violently into movements that he had very
little time left for painting of any kind.

About his painting there is some question. You couldn’t judge very much
from his productions in different colored chicken feathers and
nutshells. But as a boat builder he was superb. Henri was a wonderful
craftsman. He had lived in a tent years ago when he started his boat and
until galley and cabin were complete enough to move into. But once he
was housed and dry he had taken his time on the boat. The boat was
sculptured rather than built. It was thirty-five feet long and its lines
were in a constant state of flux. For a while it had a clipper bow and a
fantail like a destroyer. Another time it had looked vaguely like a
caravel. Since Henri had no money, it sometimes took him months to find
a plank or a piece of iron or a dozen brass screws. That was the way he
wanted it, for Henri never wanted to finish his boat.

It sat among the pine trees on a lot Henri rented for five dollars a
year. This paid the taxes and satisfied the owner. The boat rested in a
cradle on concrete foundations. A rope ladder hung over the side except
when Henri was at home. Then he pulled up the rope ladder and only put
it down when guests arrived. His little cabin had a wide padded seat
that ran around three sides of the room. On this he slept and on this
his guests sat. A table folded down when it was needed and a brass lamp
hung from the ceiling. His galley was a marvel of compactness but every
item in it had been the result of months of thought and work.

Henri was swarthy and morose. He wore a beret long after other people
abandoned them, he smoked a calabash pipe and his dark hair fell about
his face. Henri had many friends whom he loosely classified as those who
could feed him and those whom he had to feed. His boat had no name.
Henri said he would name it when it was finished.

Henri had been living in and building his boat for ten years. During
that time he had been married twice and had promoted a number of
semi-permanent liaisons. And all of these young women had left him for
the same reason. The seven-foot cabin was too small for two people. They
resented bumping their heads when they stood up and they definitely felt
the need for a toilet. Marine toilets obviously would not work in a
shore-bound boat and Henri refused to compromise with a spurious
landsman’s toilet. He and his friend of the moment had to stroll away
among the pines. And one after another his loves left him.

Just after the girl he had called Alice left him, a very curious thing
happened to Henri. Each time he was left alone, he mourned formally for
a while but actually he felt a sense of relief. He could stretch out in
his little cabin. He could eat what he wanted. He was glad to be free of
the endless female biologic functions for a while.

It had become his custom, each time he was deserted, to buy a gallon of
wine, to stretch out on the comfortably hard bunk and get drunk.
Sometimes he cried a little all by himself but it was luxurious stuff
and he usually had a wonderful feeling of well-being from it. He would
read Rimbaud aloud with a very bad accent, marveling the while at his
fluid speech.

It was during one of his ritualistic mournings for the lost Alice that
the strange thing began to happen. It was night and his lamp was burning
and he had just barely begun to get drunk when suddenly he knew he was
no longer alone. He let his eye wander cautiously up and across the
cabin and there on the other side sat a devilish young man, a dark
handsome young man. His eyes gleamed with cleverness and spirit and
energy and his teeth flashed. There was something very dear and yet very
terrible in his face. And beside him sat a golden-haired little boy,
hardly more than a baby. The man looked down at the baby and the baby
looked back and laughed delightedly as though something wonderful were
about to happen. Then the man looked over at Henri and smiled and he
glanced back at the baby. From his upper left vest pocket he took an
old-fashioned straight-edged razor. He opened it and indicated the child
with a gesture of his head. He put a hand among the curls and the baby
laughed gleefully and then the man tilted the chin and cut the baby’s
throat and the baby went right on laughing. But Henri was howling with
terror. It took him a long time to realize that neither the man nor the
baby was still there.

Henri, when his shaking had subsided a little, rushed out of his cabin,
leaped over the side of the boat and hurried away down the hill through
the pines. He walked for several hours and at last he walked down to
Cannery Row.

Doc was in the basement working on cats when Henri burst in. Doc went on
working while Henri told about it and when it was over Doc looked
closely at him to see how much actual fear and how much theater was
there. And it was mostly fear.

“Is it a ghost do you think?” Henri demanded. “Is it some reflection of
something that has happened or is it some Freudian horror out of me or
am I completely nuts? I saw it, I tell you. It happened right in front
of me as plainly as I see you.”

“I don’t know,” said Doc.

“Well, will you come up with me, and see if it comes back?”

“No,” said Doc. “If I saw it, it might be a ghost and it would scare me
badly because I don’t believe in ghosts. And if you saw it again and I
didn’t it would be a hallucination and you would be frightened.”

“But what am I going to do?” Henri asked. “If I see it again I’ll know
what’s going to happen and I’m sure I’ll die. You see he doesn’t look
like a murderer. He looks nice and the kid looks nice and neither of
them give a damn. But he cut that baby’s throat. I saw it.”

“I don’t know,” said Doc. “I’m not a psychiatrist or a witch hunter and
I’m not going to start now.”

A girl’s voice called into the basement. “Hi, Doc, can I come in?”

“Come along,” said Doc.

She was a rather pretty and a very alert girl.

Doc introduced her to Henri.

“He’s got a problem,” said Doc. “He either has a ghost or a terrible
conscience and he doesn’t know which. Tell her about it, Henri.”

Henri went over the story again and the girl’s eyes sparkled.

“But that’s horrible,” she said when he finished. “I’ve never in my life
even caught the smell of a ghost. Let’s go back up and see if he comes
again.”

Doc watched them go a little sourly. After all it had been his date.

The girl never did see the ghost but she was fond of Henri and it was
five months before the cramped cabin and the lack of a toilet drove her
out.


                               CHAPTER 23

A BLACK GLOOM settled over the Palace Flophouse. All the joy went out of
it. Mack came back from the laboratory with his mouth torn and his teeth
broken. As a kind of penance, he did not wash his face. He went to his
bed and pulled his blanket over his head and he didn’t get up all day.
His heart was as bruised as his mouth. He went over all the bad things
he had done in his life and everything he had ever done seemed bad. He
was very sad.

Hughie and Jones sat for a while staring into space and then morosely
they went over to the Hediondo Cannery and applied for jobs and got
them.

Hazel felt so bad that he walked to Monterey and picked a fight with a
soldier and lost it on purpose. That made him feel a little better to be
utterly beaten by a man Hazel could have licked without half trying.

Darling was the only happy one of the whole club. She spent the day
under Mack’s bed happily eating up his shoes. She was a clever dog and
her teeth were very sharp. Twice in his black despair, Mack reached
under the bed and caught her and put her in bed with him for company but
she squirmed out and went back to eating his shoes.

Eddie mooned on down to La Ida and talked to his friend the bartender.
He got a few drinks and borrowed some nickels with which he played
_Melancholy Baby_ five times on the juke box.

Mack and the boys were under a cloud and they knew it and they knew they
deserved it. They had become social outcasts. All of their good
intentions were forgotten now. The fact that the party was given for
Doc, if it was known, was never mentioned or taken into consideration.
The story ran through the Bear Flag. It was told in the canneries. At La
Ida drunks discussed it virtuously. Lee Chong refused to comment. He was
feeling financially bruised. And the story as it grew went this way:
They had stolen liquor and money. They had maliciously broken into the
laboratory and systematically destroyed it out of pure malice and evil.
People who really knew better took this view. Some of the drunks at La
Ida considered going over and beating the hell out of the whole lot of
them to show them they couldn’t do a thing like that to Doc.

Only a sense of the solidarity and fighting ability of Mack and the boys
saved them from some kind of reprisal. There were people who felt
virtuous about the affair who hadn’t had the material of virtue for a
long time. The fiercest of the whole lot was Tom Sheligan who would have
been at the party if he had known about it.

Socially Mack and the boys were beyond the pale. Sam Malloy didn’t speak
to them as they went by the boiler. They drew into themselves and no one
could foresee how they would come out of the cloud. For there are two
possible reactions to social ostracism—either a man emerges determined
to be better, purer, and kindlier or he goes bad, challenges the world
and does even worse things. This last is by far the commonest reaction
to stigma.

Mack and the boys balanced on the scales of good and evil. They were
kind and sweet to Darling; they were forbearing and patient with one
another. When the first reaction was over they gave the Palace Flophouse
a cleaning such as it had never had. They polished the bright work on
the stove and they washed all their clothes and blankets. Financially
they had become dull and solvent. Hughie and Jones were working and
bringing home their pay. They bought groceries up the hill at the Thrift
Market because they could not stand the reproving eyes of Lee Chong.

It was during this time that Doc made an observation which may have been
true, but since there was one factor missing in his reasoning it is not
known whether he was correct. It was the Fourth of July. Doc was sitting
in the laboratory with Richard Frost. They drank beer and listened to a
new album of Scarlatti and looked out the window. In front of the Palace
Flophouse there was a large log of wood where Mack and the boys were
sitting in the mid-morning sun. They faced down the hill toward the
laboratory.

Doc said, “Look at them. There are your true philosophers. I think,” he
went on, “that Mack and the boys know everything that has ever happened
in the world and possibly everything that will happen. I think they
survive in this particular world better than other people. In a time
when people tear themselves to pieces with ambition and nervousness and
covetousness, they are relaxed. All of our so-called successful men are
sick men, with bad stomachs, and bad souls, but Mack and the boys are
healthy and curiously clean. They can do what they want. They can
satisfy their appetites without calling them something else.” This
speech so dried out Doc’s throat that he drained his beer glass. He
waved two fingers in the air and smiled. “There’s nothing like that
first taste of beer,” he said.

Richard Frost said, “I think they’re just like anyone else. They just
haven’t any money.”

“They could get it,” Doc said. “They could ruin their lives and get
money. Mack has qualities of genius. They’re all very clever if they
want something. They just know the nature of things too well to be
caught in that wanting.”

If Doc had known of the sadness of Mack and the boys he would not have
made the next statement, but no one had told him about the social
pressure that was exerted against the inmates of the Palace.

He poured beer slowly into his glass. “I think I can show you proof,” he
said. “You see how they are sitting facing this way? Well—in about half
an hour the Fourth of July Parade is going to pass on Lighthouse Avenue.
By just turning their heads they can see it, by standing up they can
watch it, and by walking two short blocks they can be right beside it.
Now I’ll bet you a quart of beer they won’t even turn their heads.”

“Suppose they don’t?” said Richard Frost. “What will that prove?”

“What will it prove?” cried Doc. “Why just that they know what will be
in the parade. They will know that the Mayor will ride first in an
automobile with bunting streaming back from the hood. Next will come
Long Bob on his white horse with the flag. Then the city council, then
two companies of soldiers from the Presidio, next the Elks with purple
umbrellas, then the Knights Templar in white ostrich feathers and
carrying swords. Next the Knights of Columbus with red ostrich feathers
and carrying swords. Mack and the boys know that. The band will play.
They’ve seen it all. They don’t have to look again.”

“The man doesn’t live who doesn’t have to look at a parade,” said
Richard Frost.

“Is it a bet then?”

“It’s a bet.”

“It has always seemed strange to me,” said Doc. “The things we admire in
men, kindness and generosity, openness, honesty, understanding and
feeling are the concomitants of failure in our system. And those traits
we detest, sharpness, greed, acquisitiveness, meanness, egotism and
self-interest are the traits of success. And while men admire the
quality of the first they love the produce of the second.”

“Who wants to be good if he has to be hungry too?” said Richard Frost.

“Oh, it isn’t a matter of hunger. It’s something quite different. The
sale of souls to gain the whole world is completely voluntary and almost
unanimous—but not quite. Everywhere in the world there are Mack and the
boys. I’ve seen them in an ice-cream seller in Mexico and in an Aleut in
Alaska. You know how they tried to give me a party and something went
wrong. But they wanted to give me a party. That was their impulse.
Listen,” said Doc. “Isn’t that the band I hear?” Quickly he filled two
glasses with beer and the two of them stepped close to the window.

Mack and the boys sat dejectedly on their log and faced the laboratory.
The sound of the band came from Lighthouse Avenue, the drums echoing
back from the buildings. And suddenly the Mayor’s car crossed and it
sprayed bunting from the radiator—then Long Bob on his white horse
carrying the flag, then the band, then the soldiers, the Elks, the
Knights Templar, the Knights of Columbus. Richard and the Doc leaned
forward tensely but they were watching the line of men sitting on the
log.

And not a head turned, not a neck straightened up. The parade filed past
and they did not move. And the parade was gone. Doc drained his glass
and waved two fingers gently in the air and he said, “Hah! There’s
nothing in the world like that first taste of beer.”

Richard started for the door. “What kind of beer do you want?”

“The same kind,” said Doc gently. He was smiling up the hill at Mack and
the boys.

It’s all fine to say, “Time will heal everything, this too shall pass
away. People will forget”—and things like that when you are not
involved, but when you are there is no passage of time, people do not
forget and you are in the middle of something that does not change. Doc
didn’t know the pain and self-destructive criticism in the Palace
Flophouse or he might have tried to do something about it. And Mack and
the boys did not know how he felt or they would have held up their heads
again.

It was a bad time. Evil stalked darkly in the vacant lot. Sam Malloy had
a number of fights with his wife and she cried all the time. The echoes
inside the boiler made it sound as though she were crying under water.
Mack and the boys seemed to be the node of trouble. The nice bouncer at
the Bear Flag threw out a drunk, but threw him too hard and too far and
broke his back. Alfred had to go over to Salinas three times before it
was cleared up and that didn’t make Alfred feel very well. Ordinarily he
was too good a bouncer to hurt anyone. His A and C was a miracle of
rhythm and grace.

On top of that a group of high-minded ladies in the town demanded that
dens of vice must close to protect young American manhood. This happened
about once a year in the dead period between the Fourth of July and the
County Fair. Dora usually closed the Bear Flag for a week when it
happened. It wasn’t so bad. Everyone got a vacation and little repairs
to the plumbing and the walls could be made. But this year the ladies
went on a real crusade. They wanted somebody’s scalp. It had been a dull
summer and they were restless. It got so bad that they had to be told
who actually owned the property where vice was practiced, what the rents
were and what little hardships might be the result of their closing.
That was how close they were to being a serious menace.

Dora was closed a full two weeks and there were three conventions in
Monterey while the Bear Flag was closed. Word got around and Monterey
lost five conventions for the following year. Things were bad all over.
Doc had to get a loan at the bank to pay for the glass that was broken
at the party. Elmer Rechati went to sleep on the Southern Pacific track
and lost both legs. A sudden and completely unexpected storm tore a
purse-seiner and three lampara boats loose from their moorings and
tossed them broken and sad on Del Monte beach.

There is no explaining a series of misfortunes like that. Every man
blames himself. People in their black minds remember sins committed
secretly and wonder whether they have caused the evil sequence. One man
may put it down to sun spots while another invoking the law of
probabilities doesn’t believe it. Not even the doctors had a good time
of it, for while many people were sick none of it was good-paying
sickness. It was nothing a good physic or a patent medicine wouldn’t
take care of.

And to cap it all, Darling got sick. She was a very fat and lively puppy
when she was struck down, but five days of fever reduced her to a little
skin-covered skeleton. Her liver-colored nose was pink and her gums were
white. Her eyes glazed with illness and her whole body was hot although
she trembled sometimes with cold. She wouldn’t eat and she wouldn’t
drink and her fat little belly shriveled up against her spine, and even
her tail showed the articulations through the skin. It was obviously
distemper.

Now a genuine panic came over the Palace Flophouse. Darling had come to
be vastly important to them. Hughie and Jones instantly quit their jobs
so they could be near to help. They sat up in shifts. They kept a cool
damp cloth on her forehead and she got weaker and sicker. Finally,
although they didn’t want to, Hazel and Jones were chosen to call on
Doc. They found him working over a tide chart while he ate a chicken
stew of which the principal ingredient was not chicken but sea cucumber.
They thought he looked at them a little coldly.

“It’s Darling,” they said. “She’s sick.”

“What’s the matter with her?”

“Mack says it’s distemper.”

“I’m no veterinarian,” said Doc. “I don’t know how to treat these
things.”

Hazel said, “Well, couldn’t you just take a look at her? She’s sick as
hell.”

They stood in a circle while Doc examined Darling. He looked at her
eyeballs and her gums and felt in her ear for fever. He ran his finger
over the ribs that stuck out like spokes and at the poor spine. “She
won’t eat?” he asked.

“Not a thing,” said Mack.

“You’ll have to force feed her—strong soup and eggs and cod liver oil.”

They thought he was cold and professional. He went back to his tide
charts and his stew.

But Mack and the boys had something to do now. They boiled meat until it
was as strong as whiskey. They put cod liver oil far back on her tongue
so that some of it got down her. They held up her head and made a little
funnel of her chops and poured the cool soup in. She had to swallow or
drown. Every two hours they fed her and gave her water. Before they had
slept in shifts—now no one slept. They sat silently and waited for
Darling’s crisis.

It came early in the morning. The boys sat in their chairs half asleep
but Mack was awake and his eyes were on the puppy. He saw her ears flip
twice, and her chest heave. With infinite weakness she climbed slowly to
her spindly legs, dragged herself to the door, took four laps of water
and collapsed on the floor.

Mack shouted the others awake. He danced heavily. All the boys shouted
at one another. Lee Chong heard them and snorted to himself as he
carried out the garbage cans. Alfred the bouncer heard them and thought
they were having a party.

By nine o’clock Darling had eaten a raw egg and half a pint of whipped
cream by herself. By noon she was visibly putting on weight. In a day
she romped a little and by the end of the week she was a well dog.

At last a crack had developed in the wall of evil. There were evidences
of it everywhere. The purse-seiner was hauled back into the water and
floated. Word came down to Dora that it was all right to open up the
Bear Flag. Earl Wakefield caught a sculpin with two heads and sold it to
the museum for eight dollars. The wall of evil and of waiting was
broken. It broke away in chunks. The curtains were drawn at the
laboratory that night and Gregorian music played until two o’clock and
then the music stopped and no one came out. Some force wrought with Lee
Chong’s heart and all in an Oriental moment he forgave Mack and the boys
and wrote off the frog debt which had been a monetary headache from the
beginning. And to prove to the boys that he had forgiven them he took a
pint of Old Tennis Shoes up and presented it to them. Their trading at
the Thrift Market had hurt his feelings but it was all over now. Lee’s
visit coincided with the first destructive healthy impulse Darling had
since her illness. She was completely spoiled now and no one thought of
housebreaking her. When Lee Chong came in with his gift, Darling was
deliberately and happily destroying Hazel’s only pair of rubber boots
while her happy masters applauded her.

Mack never visited the Bear Flag professionally. It would have seemed a
little like incest to him. There was a house out by the baseball park he
patronized. Thus, when he went into the front bar, everyone thought he
wanted a beer. He stepped up to Alfred. “Dora around?” he asked.

“What do you want with her?” Alfred asked.

“I got something I want to ask her.”

“What about?”

“That’s none of your God damn business,” said Mack.

“Okay. Have it your way. I’ll see if she wants to talk to you.”

A moment later he led Mack into the sanctum. Dora sat at a rolltop desk.
Her orange hair was piled in ringlets on her head and she wore a green
eyeshade. With a stub pen she was bringing her books up to date, a fine
old double entry ledger. She was dressed in a magnificent pink silk
wrapper with lace at the wrists and throat. When Mack came in she
whirled her pivot chair about and faced him. Alfred stood in the door
and waited. Mack stood until Alfred closed the door and left.

Dora scrutinized him suspiciously. “Well—what can I do for you?” she
demanded at last.

“You see, ma’am,” said Mack—“Well I guess you heard what we done over
at Doc’s some time back.”

Dora pushed the eyeshade back up on her head and she put the pen in an
old-fashioned coil-spring holder. “Yeah!” she said. “I heard.”

“Well, ma’am, we did it for Doc. You may not believe it but we wanted to
give him a party. Only he didn’t get home in time and—well she got out
of hand.”

“So I heard,” said Dora. “Well, what you want me to do?”

“Well,” said Mack, “I and the boys thought we’d ask you. You know what
we think of Doc. We wanted to ask you what you thought we could do for
him that would kind of show him.”

Dora said, “Hum,” and she flopped back in her pivot chair and crossed
her legs and smoothed her wrapper over her knees. She shook out a
cigarette, lighted it and studied. “You gave him a party he didn’t get
to. Why don’t you give him a party he does get to?” she said.

“Jesus,” said Mack afterwards talking to the boys. “It was just as
simple as that. Now there is one hell of a woman. No wonder she got to
be a madam. There is one hell of a woman.”


                               CHAPTER 24

MARY TALBOT, Mrs. Tom Talbot, that is, was lovely. She had red hair with
green lights in it. Her skin was golden with a green under cast and her
eyes were green with little golden spots. Her face was triangular, with
wide cheek-bones, wide-set eyes, and her chin was pointed. She had long
dancer’s legs and dancer’s feet and she seemed never to touch the ground
when she walked. When she was excited, and she was excited a good deal
of the time, her face flushed with gold. Her
great-great-great-great-great grandmother had been burned as a witch.

More than anything in the world Mary Talbot loved parties. She loved to
give parties and she loved to go to parties. Since Tom Talbot didn’t
make much money Mary couldn’t give parties all the time so she tricked
people into giving them. Sometimes she telephoned a friend and said
bluntly, “Isn’t it about time you gave a party?”

Regularly Mary had six birthdays a year, and she organized costume
parties, surprise parties, holiday parties. Christmas Eve at her house
was a very exciting thing. For Mary glowed with parties. She carried her
husband Tom along on the wave of her excitement.

In the afternoons when Tom was at work Mary sometimes gave tea parties
for the neighborhood cats. She set a footstool with doll cups and
saucers. She gathered the cats, and there were plenty of them, and then
she held long and detailed conversations with them. It was a kind of
play she enjoyed very much—a kind of satiric game and it covered and
concealed from Mary the fact that she didn’t have very nice clothes and
the Talbots didn’t have any money. They were pretty near absolute bottom
most of the time, and when they really scraped, Mary managed to give
some kind of a party.

She could do that. She could infect a whole house with gaiety and she
used her gift as a weapon against the despondency that lurked always
around outside the house waiting to get in at Tom. That was Mary’s job
as she saw it—to keep the despondency away from Tom because everyone
knew he was going to be a great success some time. Mostly she was
successful in keeping the dark things out of the house but sometimes
they got in at Tom and laid him out. Then he would sit and brood for
hours while Mary frantically built up a backfire of gaiety.

One time when it was the first of the month and there were curt notes
from the water company and the rent wasn’t paid and a manuscript had
come back from _Collier’s_ and the cartoons had come back from _The New
Yorker_ and pleurisy was hurting Tom pretty badly, he went into the
bedroom and lay down on the bed.

Mary came softly in, for the blue-gray color of his gloom had seeped out
under the door and through the keyhole. She had a little bouquet of
candy tuft in a collar of paper lace.

“Smell,” she said and held the bouquet to his nose. He smelled the
flowers and said nothing. “Do you know what day this is?” she asked and
thought wildly for something to make it a bright day.

Tom said, “Why don’t we face it for once? We’re down. We’re going under.
What’s the good kidding ourselves?”

“No we’re not,” said Mary. “We’re magic people. We always have been.
Remember that ten dollars you found in a book—remember when your cousin
sent you five dollars? Nothing can happen to us.”

“Well, it has happened,” said Tom. “I’m sorry,” he said. “I just can’t
talk myself out of it this time. I’m sick of pretending everything. For
once I’d like to have it real—just for once.”

“I thought of giving a little party tonight,” said Mary.

“On what? You’re not going to cut out the baked ham picture from a
magazine again and serve it on a platter, are you? I’m sick of that kind
of kidding. It isn’t funny any more. It’s sad.”

“I could give a little party,” she insisted. “Just a small affair.
Nobody will dress. It’s the anniversary of the founding of the Bloomer
League—you didn’t even remember that.”

“It’s no use,” said Tom. “I know it’s mean but I just can’t rise to it.
Why don’t you just go out and shut the door and leave me alone? I’ll get
you down if you don’t.”

She looked at him closely and saw that he meant it. Mary walked quietly
out and shut the door, and Tom turned over on the bed and put his face
down between his arms. He could hear her rustling about in the other
room.

She decorated the door with old Christmas things, glass balls, and
tinsel, and she made a placard that said “Welcome Tom, our Hero.” She
listened at the door and couldn’t hear anything. A little disconsolately
she got out the footstool and spread a napkin over it. She put her
bouquet in a glass in the middle of the footstool and set out four
little cups and saucers. She went into the kitchen, put the tea in the
teapot and set the kettle to boil. Then she went out into the yard.

Kitty Randolph was sunning herself by the front fence. Mary said, “Miss
Randolph—I’m having a few friends in to tea if you would care to come.”
Kitty Randolph rolled over languorously on her back and stretched in the
warm sun. “Don’t be later than four o’clock,” said Mary. “My husband and
I are going to the Bloomer League Centennial Reception at the Hotel.”

She strolled around the house to the backyard where the blackberry vines
clambered over the fence. Kitty Casini was squatting on the ground
growling to herself and flicking her tail fiercely. “Mrs. Casini,” Mary
began and then she stopped for she saw what the cat was doing. Kitty
Casini had a mouse. She patted it gently with her unarmed paw and the
mouse squirmed horribly away dragging its paralyzed hind legs behind it.
The cat let it get nearly to the cover of the blackberry vines and then
she reached delicately out and white thorns had sprouted on her paw.
Daintily she stabbed the mouse through the back and drew it wriggling to
her and her tail flicked with tense delight.

Tom must have been at least half asleep when he heard his name called
over and over. He jumped up shouting, “What is it? Where are you?” He
could hear Mary crying. He ran out into the yard and saw what was
happening. “Turn your head,” he shouted and he killed the mouse. Kitty
Casini had leaped to the top of the fence where she watched him angrily.
Tom picked up a rock and hit her in the stomach and knocked her off the
fence.

In the house Mary was still crying a little. She poured the water into
the teapot and brought it to the table. “Sit there,” she told Tom and he
squatted down on the floor in front of the footstool.

“Can’t I have a big cup?” he asked.

“I can’t blame Kitty Casini,” said Mary. “I know how cats are. It isn’t
her fault. But—Oh, Tom! I’m going to have trouble inviting her again.
I’m just not going to like her for a while no matter how much I want
to.” She looked closely at Tom and saw that the lines were gone from his
forehead and that he was not blinking badly. “But then I’m so busy with
the Bloomer League these days,” she said, “I just don’t know how I’m
going to get everything done.”

Mary Talbot gave a pregnancy party that year. And everyone said, “God! A
kid of hers is going to have fun.”


                               CHAPTER 25

CERTAINLY ALL of Cannery Row and probably all of Monterey felt that a
change had come. It’s all right not to believe in luck and omens. Nobody
believes in them. But it doesn’t do any good to take chances with them
and no one takes chances. Cannery Row, like every place else, is not
superstitious but will not walk under a ladder or open an umbrella in
the house. Doc was a pure scientist and incapable of superstition and
yet when he came in late one night and found a line of white flowers
across the doorsill he had a bad time of it. But most people in Cannery
Row simply do not believe in such things and then live by them.

There was no doubt in Mack’s mind that a dark cloud had hung on the
Palace Flophouse. He had analyzed the abortive party and found that a
misfortune had crept into every crevice, that bad luck had come up like
hives on the evening. And once you got into a routine like that the best
thing to do was just to go to bed until it was over. You couldn’t buck
it. Not that Mack was superstitious.

Now a kind of gladness began to penetrate into the Row and to spread out
from there. Doc was almost supernaturally successful with a series of
lady visitors. He didn’t half try. The puppy at the Palace was growing
like a pole bean, and having a thousand generations of training behind
her, she began to train herself. She got disgusted with wetting on the
floor and took to going outside. It was obvious that Darling was going
to grow up a good and charming dog. And she had developed no chorea from
her distemper.

The benignant influence crept like gas through the Row. It got as far as
Herman’s hamburger stand, it spread to the San Carlos Hotel. Jimmy
Brucia felt it and Johnny his singing bartender. Sparky Evea felt it and
joyously joined battle with three new out of town cops. It even got as
far as the County Jail in Salinas where Gay, who had lived a good life
by letting the sheriff beat him at checkers, suddenly grew cocky and
never lost another game. He lost his privileges that way but he felt a
whole man again.

The sea lions felt it and their barking took on a tone and a cadence
that would have gladdened the heart of St. Francis. Little girls
studying their catechism suddenly looked up and giggled for no reason at
all. Perhaps some electrical finder could have been developed so
delicate that it could have located the source of all this spreading joy
and fortune. And triangulation might possibly have located it in the
Palace Flophouse and Grill. Certainly the Palace was lousy with it. Mack
and the boys were charged. Jones was seen to leap from his chair only to
do a quick tap dance and sit down again. Hazel smiled vaguely at nothing
at all. The joy was so general and so suffused that Mack had a hard time
keeping it centered and aimed at its objective. Eddie who had worked at
La Ida pretty regularly was accumulating a cellar of some promise. He no
longer added beer to the wining jug. It gave a flat taste to the
mixture, he said.

Sam Malloy had planted morning glories to grow over the boiler. He had
put out a little awning and under it he and his wife often sat in the
evening. She was crocheting a bedspread.

The joy even got into the Bear Flag. Business was good. Phyllis Mae’s
leg was knitting nicely and she was nearly ready to go to work again.
Eva Flanegan got back from East St. Louis very glad to be back. It had
been hot in East St. Louis and it hadn’t been as fine as she remembered
it. But then she had been younger when she had had so much fun there.

The knowledge or conviction about the party for Doc was no sudden thing.
It did not burst out full blown. People knew about it but let it grow
gradually like a pupa in the cocoons of their imaginations.

Mack was realistic about it. “Last time we forced her,” he told the
boys. “You can’t never give a good party that way. You got to let her
creep up on you.”

“Well, when’s it going to be?” Jones asked impatiently.

“I don’t know,” said Mack.

“Is it gonna be a surprise party?” Hazel asked.

“It ought to, that’s the best kind,” said Mack.

Darling brought him a tennis ball she had found and he threw it out the
door into the weeds. She bounced away after it.

Hazel said, “If we knew when was Doc’s birthday, we could give him a
birthday party.”

Mack’s mouth was open. Hazel constantly surprised him. “By God, Hazel,
you got something,” he cried. “Yes, sir, if it was his birthday there’d
be presents. That’s just the thing. All we got to find out is when it
is.”

“That ought to be easy,” said Hughie. “Why don’t we ask him?”

“Hell,” said Mack. “Then he’d catch on. You ask a guy when is his
birthday and especially if you’ve already give him a party like we done,
and he’ll know what you want to know for. Maybe I’ll just go over and
smell around a little and not let on.”

“I’ll go with you,” said Hazel.

“No—if two of us went, he might figure we were up to something.”

“Well, hell, it was my idear,” said Hazel.

“I know,” said Mack. “And when it comes off why I’ll tell Doc it was
your idear. But I think I better go over alone.”

“How is he—friendly?” Eddie asked.

“Sure, he’s all right.”

Mack found Doc way back in the downstairs part of the laboratory. He was
dressed in a long rubber apron and he wore rubber gloves to protect his
hands from the formaldehyde. He was injecting the veins and arteries of
small dogfish with color mass. His little ball mill rolled over and
over, mixing the blue mass. The red fluid was already in the pressure
gun. Doc’s fine hands worked precisely, slipping the needle into place
and pressing the compressed air trigger that forced the color into the
veins. He laid the finished fish in a neat pile. He would have to go
over these again to put blue mass in the arteries. The dogfish made good
dissection specimens.

“Hi, Doc,” said Mack. “Keepin’ pretty busy?”

“Busy as I want,” said Doc. “How’s the pup?”

“Doin’ just fine. She would of died if it hadn’t been for you.”

For a moment a wave of caution went over Doc and then slipped off.
Ordinarily a compliment made him wary. He had been dealing with Mack for
a long time. But the tone had nothing but gratefulness in it. He knew
how Mack felt about the pup. “How are things going up at the Palace?”

“Fine, Doc, just fine. We got two new chairs. I wish you’d come up and
see us. It’s pretty nice up there now.”

“I will,” said Doc. “Eddie still bring back the jug?”

“Sure,” said Mack. “He ain’t puttin’ beer in it no more and I think the
stuff is better. It’s got more zip.”

“It had plenty of zip before,” said Doc.

Mack waited patiently. Sooner or later Doc was going to wade into it and
he was waiting. If Doc seemed to open the subject himself it would be
less suspicious. This was always Mack’s method.

“Haven’t seen Hazel for some time. He isn’t sick, is he?”

“No,” said Mack and he opened the campaign. “Hazel is all right. Him and
Hughie are havin’ one hell of a battle. Been goin’ on for a week,” he
chuckled. “An’ the funny thing is it’s about somethin’ they don’t
neither of them know nothin’ about. I stayed out of it because I don’t
know nothin’ about it neither, but not them. They’ve even got a little
mad at each other.”

“What’s it about?” Doc asked.

“Well, sir,” said Mack, “Hazel’s all the time buyin’ these here charts
and lookin’ up lucky days and stars and stuff like that. And Hughie says
it’s all a bunch of malarky. Hughie, he says if you know when a guy is
born you can tell about him and Hughie says they’re just sellin’ Hazel
them charts for two bits apiece. Me, I don’t know nothin’ about it. What
do you think, Doc?”

“I’d kind of side with Hughie,” said Doc. He stopped the ball mill,
washed out the color gun and filled it with blue mass.

“They got goin’ hot the other night,” said Mack. “They ask me when I’m
born so I tell ’em April 12 and Hazel he goes and buys one of them
charts and read all about me. Well it did seem to hit in some places.
But it was nearly all good stuff and a guy will believe good stuff about
himself. It said I’m brave and smart and kind to my friends. But Hazel
says it’s all true. When’s your birthday, Doc?” At the end of the long
discussion it sounded perfectly casual. You couldn’t put your finger on
it. But it must be remembered that Doc had known Mack a very long time.
If he had not he would have said December 18 which was his birthday
instead of October 27 which was not. “October 27,” said Doc. “Ask Hazel
what that makes me.”

“It’s probably so much malarky,” said Mack, “but Hazel he takes it
serious. I’ll ask him to look you up, Doc.”

When Mack left, Doc wondered casually what the build-up was. For he had
recognized it as a lead. He knew Mack’s technique, his method. He
recognized his style. And he wondered to what purpose Mack could put the
information. It was only later when rumors began to creep in that Doc
added the whole thing up. Now he felt slightly relieved, for he had
expected Mack to put the bite on him.


                               CHAPTER 26

THE TWO little boys played in the boat works yard until a cat climbed
the fence. Instantly they gave chase, drove it across the tracks and
there filled their pockets with granite stones from the roadbed. The cat
got away from them in the tall weeds but they kept the stones because
they were perfect in weight, shape, and size for throwing. You can’t
ever tell when you’re going to need a stone like that. They turned down
Cannery Row and whanged a stone at the corrugated iron front of Morden’s
Cannery. A startled man looked out the office window and then rushed for
the door, but the boys were too quick for him. They were lying behind a
wooden stringer in the lot before he even got near the door. He couldn’t
have found them in a hundred years.

“I bet he could look all his life and he couldn’t find us,” said Joey.

They got tired of hiding after a while with no one looking for them.
They got up and strolled on down Cannery Row. They looked a long time in
Lee’s window coveting the pliers, the hack saws, the engineers’ caps and
the bananas. Then they crossed the street and sat down on the lower step
of the stairs that went to the second story of the laboratory.

Joey said, “You know, this guy in here got babies in bottles.”

“What kind of babies?” Willard asked.

“Regular babies, only before they’re borned.”

“I don’t believe it,” said Willard.

“Well, it’s true. The Sprague kid seen them and he says they ain’t no
bigger than this and they got little hands and feet and eyes.”

“And hair?” Willard demanded.

“Well, the Sprague kid didn’t say about hair.”

“You should of asked him. I think he’s a liar.”

“You better not let him hear you say that,” said Joey.

“Well, you can tell him I said it. I ain’t afraid of him and I ain’t
afraid of you. I ain’t afraid of anybody. You want to make something of
it?” Joey didn’t answer. “Well, do you?”

“No,” said Joey. “I was thinkin’, why don’t we just go up and ask the
guy if he’s got babies in bottles? Maybe he’d show them to us, that is
if he’s got any.”

“He ain’t here,” said Willard. “When he’s here, his car’s here. He’s
away some place. I think it’s a lie. I think the Sprague kid is a liar.
I think you’re a liar. You want to make something of that?”

It was a lazy day. Willard was going to have to work hard to get up any
excitement. “I think you’re a coward, too. You want to make something of
that?” Joey didn’t answer. Willard changed his tactics. “Where’s your
old man now?” he asked in a conversational tone.

“He’s dead,” said Joey.

“Oh yeah? I didn’t hear. What’d he die of?”

For a moment Joey was silent. He knew Willard knew but he couldn’t let
on he knew, not without fighting Willard, and Joey was afraid of
Willard.

“He committed—he killed himself.”

“Yeah?” Willard put on a long face. “How’d he do it?”

“He took rat poison.”

Willard’s voice shrieked with laughter. “What’d he think—he was a rat?”

Joey chuckled a little at the joke, just enough, that is.

“He must of thought he was a rat,” Willard cried. “Did he go crawling
around like this—look, Joey—like this? Did he wrinkle up his nose like
this? Did he have a big old long tail?” Willard was helpless with
laughter. “Why’n’t he just get a rat trap and put his head in it?” They
laughed themselves out on that one. Willard really wore it out. Then he
probed for another joke. “What’d he look like when he took it—like
this?” He crossed his eyes and opened his mouth and stuck out his
tongue.

“He was sick all day,” said Joey. “He didn’t die ’til the middle of the
night. It hurt him.”

Willard said, “What’d he do it for?”

“He couldn’t get a job,” said Joey. “Nearly a year he couldn’t get a
job. And you know a funny thing? The next morning a guy come around to
give him a job.”

Willard tried to recapture his joke. “I guess he just figured he was a
rat,” he said, but it fell through even for Willard.

Joey stood up and put his hands in his pockets. He saw a little coppery
shine in the gutter and walked toward it but just as he reached it
Willard shoved him aside and picked up the penny.

“I saw it first,” Joey cried. “It’s mine.”

“You want to try and make something of it?” said Willard. “Why’n’t you
go take some rat poison?”


                               CHAPTER 27

MACK AND the boys—the Virtues, the Beatitudes, the Beauties. They sat
in the Palace Flophouse and they were the stone dropped in the pool, the
impulse which sent out ripples to all of Cannery Row and beyond, to
Pacific Grove, to Monterey, even over the hill to Carmel.

“This time,” said Mack, “we got to be sure he gets to the party. If he
don’t get there, we don’t give it.”

“Where we going to give it this time?” Jones asked.

Mack tipped his chair back against the wall and hooked his feet around
the front legs. “I’ve give that a lot of thought,” he said. “Of course
we could give it here but it would be pretty hard to surprise him here.
And Doc likes his own place. He’s got his music there.” Mack scowled
around the room. “I don’t know who broke his phonograph last time,” he
said. “But if anybody so much as lays a finger on it next time I
personally will kick the hell out of him.”

“I guess we’ll just have to give it at his place,” said Hughie.

People didn’t get the news of the party—the knowledge of it just slowly
grew up in them. And no one was invited. Everyone was going. October 27
had a mental red circle around it. And since it was to be a birthday
party there were presents to be considered.

Take the girls at Dora’s. All of them had at one time or another gone
over to the laboratory for advice or medicine or simply for
unprofessional company. And they had seen Doc’s bed. It was covered with
an old faded red blanket full of fox tails and burrs and sand, for he
took it on all his collecting trips. If money came in he bought
laboratory equipment. It never occurred to him to buy a new blanket for
himself. Dora’s girls were making him a patchwork quilt, a beautiful
thing of silk. And since most of the silk available came from
underclothing and evening dresses, the quilt was glorious in strips of
flesh pink and orchid and pale yellow and cerise. They worked on it in
the late mornings and in the afternoons before the boys from the sardine
fleet came in. Under the community of effort, those fights and ill
feelings that always are present in a whore house completely
disappeared.

Lee Chong got out and inspected a twenty-five-foot string of
firecrackers and a big bag of China lily bulbs. These to his way of
thinking were the finest things you could have for a party.

Sam Malloy had long had a theory of antiques. He knew that old furniture
and glass and crockery, which had not been very valuable in its day, had
when time went by taken on desirability and cash value out of all
proportion to its beauty or utility. He knew of one chair that had
brought five hundred dollars. Sam collected pieces of historic
automobiles and he was convinced that some day his collection, after
making him very rich, would repose on black velvet in the best museums.
Sam gave the party a good deal of thought and then he went over his
treasures which he kept in a big locked box behind the boiler. He
decided to give Doc one of his finest pieces—the connecting rod and
piston from a 1916 Chalmers. He rubbed and polished this beauty until it
gleamed like a piece of ancient armor. He made a little box for it and
lined it with black cloth.

Mack and the boys gave the problem considerable thought and came to the
conclusion that Doc always wanted cats and had some trouble getting
them. Mack brought out his double cage. They borrowed a female in an
interesting condition and set their trap under the cypress tree at the
top of the vacant lot. In the corner of the Palace they built a wire
cage and in it their collection of angry tom cats grew with every night.
Jones had to make two trips a day to the canneries for fish heads to
feed their charges. Mack considered and correctly that twenty-five tom
cats would be as nice a present as they could give Doc.

“No decorations this time,” said Mack. “Just a good solid party with
lots of liquor.”

Gay heard about the party clear over in the Salinas jail and he made a
deal with the sheriff to get off that night and borrowed two dollars
from him for a round trip bus ticket. Gay had been very nice to the
sheriff who wasn’t a man to forget it, particularly because election was
coming up and Gay could, or said he could, swing quite a few votes.
Besides, Gay could give the Salinas jail a bad name if he wanted to.

Henri had suddenly decided that the old-fashioned pincushion was an art
form which had flowered and reached its peak in the Nineties and had
since been neglected. He revived the form and was delighted to see what
could be done with colored pins. The picture was never completed—you
could change it by rearranging the pins. He was preparing a group of
these pieces for a one-man show when he heard about the party and he
instantly abandoned his own work and began a giant pincushion for Doc.
It was to be an intricate and provocative design in green, yellow, and
blue pins, all cool colors, and its title was Pre-Cambrian Memory.

Henri’s friend Eric, a learned barber who collected the first editions
of writers who never had a second edition or a second book, decided to
give Doc a rowing machine he had got at the bankruptcy proceedings of a
client with a three-year barber bill. The rowing machine was in fine
condition. No one had rowed it much. No one ever uses a rowing machine.

The conspiracy grew and there were endless visits back and forth,
discussion of presents, of liquor, of what time will we start and nobody
must tell Doc.

Doc didn’t know when he first became aware that something was going on
that concerned him. In Lee Chong’s, conversation stopped when he
entered. At first it seemed to him that people were cold to him. When at
least half a dozen people asked him what he was doing October 27 he was
puzzled, for he had forgotten he had given this date as his birthday.
Actually he had been interested in the horoscope for a spurious birth
date but Mack had never mentioned it again and so Doc forgot it.

One evening he stopped in at the Halfway House because they had a draft
beer he liked and kept it at the right temperature. He gulped his first
glass and then settled down to enjoy his second when he heard a drunk
talking to the bartender. “You goin’ to the party?”

“What party?”

“Well,” said the drunk confidentially, “you know Doc, down in Cannery
Row.”

The bartender looked up the bar and then back.

“Well,” said the drunk, “they’re givin’ him a hell of a party on his
birthday.”

“Who is?”

“Everybody.”

Doc mulled this over. He did not know the drunk at all.

His reaction to the idea was not simple. He felt a great warmth that
they should want to give him a party, and at the same time he quaked
inwardly remembering the last one they had given.

Now everything fell into place—Mack’s question and the silences when he
was about. He thought of it a lot that night sitting beside his desk. He
glanced about considering what things would have to be locked up. He
knew the party was going to cost him plenty.

The next day he began making his own preparations for the party. His
best records he carried into the back room where they could be locked
away. He moved every bit of equipment that was breakable back there too.
He knew how it would be—his guests would be hungry and they wouldn’t
bring anything to eat. They would run out of liquor early, they always
did. A little wearily he went up to the Thrift Market where there was a
fine and understanding butcher. They discussed meat for some time. Doc
ordered fifteen pounds of steaks, ten pounds of tomatoes, twelve heads
of lettuce, six loaves of bread, a big jar of peanut butter and one of
strawberry jam, five gallons of wine and four quarts of a good
substantial but not distinguished whiskey. He knew he would have trouble
at the bank the first of the month. Three or four such parties, he
thought, and he would lose the laboratory.

Meanwhile on the Row the planning reached a crescendo. Doc was right, no
one thought of food but there were odd pints and quarts put away all
over. The collection of presents was growing and the guest list, if
there had been one, was a little like a census. At the Bear Flag a
constant discussion went on about what to wear. Since they would not be
working, the girls did not want to wear the long beautiful dresses which
were their uniforms. They decided to wear street clothes. It wasn’t as
simple as it sounded. Dora insisted that a skeleton crew remain on duty
to take care of the regulars. The girls divided up into shifts, some to
stay until they were relieved by others. They had to flip for who would
go to the party first. The first ones would see Doc’s face when they
gave him the beautiful quilt. They had it on a frame in the dining room
and it was nearly finished. Mrs. Malloy had put aside her bedspread for
a while. She was crocheting six doilies for Doc’s beer glasses. The
first excitement was gone from the Row now and its place was taken by a
deadly cumulative earnestness. There were fifteen tom cats in the cage
at the Palace Flophouse and their yowling made Darling a little nervous
at night.


                               CHAPTER 28

SOONER OR later Frankie was bound to hear about the party. For Frankie
drifted about like a small cloud. He was always on the edge of groups.
No one noticed him or paid any attention to him. You couldn’t tell
whether he was listening or not. But Frankie did hear about the party
and he heard about the presents and a feeling of fullness swelled in him
and a feeling of sick longing.

In the window of Jacob’s Jewelry Store was the most beautiful thing in
the world. It had been there a long time. It was a black onyx clock with
a gold face but on top of it was the real beauty. On top was a bronze
group—St. George killing the dragon. The dragon was on his back with
his claws in the air and in his breast was St. George’s spear. The Saint
was in full armor with the visor raised and he rode a fat, big-buttocked
horse. With his spear he pinned the dragon to the ground. But the
wonderful thing was that he wore a pointed beard and he looked a little
like Doc.

Frankie walked to Alvarado Street several times a week to stand in front
of the window and look at this beauty. He dreamed about it too, dreamed
of running his fingers over the rich, smooth bronze. He had known about
it for months when he heard of the party and the presents.

Frankie stood on the sidewalk for an hour before he went inside. “Well?”
said Mr. Jacobs. He had given Frankie a visual frisk as he came in and
he knew there wasn’t 75 cents on him.

“How much is that?” Frankie asked huskily.

“What?”

“That.”

“You mean the clock? Fifty dollars—with the group seventy-five
dollars.”

Frankie walked out without replying. He went down to the beach and
crawled under an overturned rowboat and peeked out at the little waves.
The bronze beauty was so strong in his head that it seemed to stand out
in front of him. And a frantic trapped feeling came over him. He had to
get the beauty. His eyes were fierce when he thought of it.

He stayed under the boat all day and at night he emerged and went back
to Alvarado Street. While people went to the movies and came out and
went to the Golden Poppy, he walked up and down the block. And he didn’t
get tired or sleepy, for the beauty burned in him like fire.

At last the people thinned out and gradually disappeared from the
streets and the parked cars drove away and the town settled to sleep.

A policeman looked closely at Frankie. “What you doing out?” he asked.

Frankie took to his heels and fled around the corner and hid behind a
barrel in the alley. At two-thirty he crept to the door of Jacob’s and
tried the knob. It was locked. Frankie went back to the alley and sat
behind the barrel and thought. He saw a broken piece of concrete lying
beside the barrel and he picked it up.

The policeman reported that he heard the crash and ran to it. Jacob’s
window was broken. He saw the prisoner walking rapidly away and chased
him. He didn’t know how the boy could run that far and that fast
carrying fifty pounds of clock and bronze, but the prisoner nearly got
away. If he had not blundered into a blind street he would have got
away.

The chief called Doc the next day. “Come on down, will you? I want to
talk to you.”

They brought Frankie in very dirty and frowzy. His eyes were red but he
held his mouth firm and he even smiled a little welcome when he saw Doc.

“What’s the matter, Frankie?” Doc asked.

“He broke into Jacob’s last night,” the chief said. “Stole some stuff.
We got in touch with his mother. She says it’s not her fault because he
hangs around your place all the time.”

“Frankie—you shouldn’t have done it,” said Doc. The heavy stone of
inevitability was on his heart. “Can’t you parole him to me?” Doc asked.

“I don’t think the judge will do it,” said the chief. “We’ve got a
mental report. You know what’s wrong with him?”

“Yes,” said Doc, “I know.”

“And you know what’s likely to happen when he comes into puberty?”

“Yes,” said Doc, “I know,” and the stone weighed terribly on his heart.

“The doctor thinks we better put him away. We couldn’t before, but now
he’s got a felony on him, I think we better.”

As Frankie listened the welcome died in his eyes.

“What did he take?” Doc asked.

“A great big clock and a bronze statue.”

“I’ll pay for it.”

“Oh, we got it back. I don’t think the judge will hear of it. It’ll just
happen again. You know that.”

“Yes,” said Doc softly, “I know. But maybe he had a reason. Frankie,” he
said, “why did you take it?”

Frankie looked a long time at him. “I love you,” he said.

Doc ran out and got in his car and went collecting in the caves below
Pt. Lobos.


                               CHAPTER 29

AT FOUR o’clock on October 27 Doc finished bottling the last of a lot of
jellyfish. He washed out the formaline jug, cleaned his forceps,
powdered and took off his rubber gloves. He went upstairs, fed the rats,
and put some of his best records and his microscopes in the back room.
Then he locked it. Sometimes an illuminated guest wanted to play with
the rattlesnakes. By making careful preparations, by foreseeing
possibilities, Doc hoped to make this party as non-lethal as possible
without making it dull.

He put on a pot of coffee, started the _Great Fugue_ on the phonograph,
and took a shower. He was very quick about it, for he was dressed in
clean clothes and was having his cup of coffee before the music was
completed.

He looked out through the window at the lot and up at the Palace but no
one was moving. Doc didn’t know who or how many were coming to his
party. But he knew he was watched. He had been conscious of it all day.
Not that he had seen anyone, but someone or several people had kept him
in sight. So it was to be a surprise party. He might as well be
surprised. He would follow his usual routine as though nothing were
happening. He crossed to Lee Chong’s and bought two quarts of beer.
There seemed to be a suppressed Oriental excitement at Lee’s. So they
were coming too. Doc went back to the laboratory and poured out a glass
of beer. He drank the first off for thirst and poured a second one to
taste. The lot and the street were still deserted.

Mack and the boys were in the Palace and the door was closed. All
afternoon the stove had roared, heating water for baths. Even Darling
had been bathed and she wore a red bow around her neck.

“What time you think we should go over?” Hazel asked.

“I don’t think before eight o’clock,” said Mack. “But I don’t see
nothin’ against us havin’ a short one to kind of get warmed up.”

“How about Doc getting warmed up?” Hughie said. “Maybe I ought to just
take him a bottle like it was just nothing.”

“No,” said Mack. “Doc just went over to Lee’s for some beer.”

“You think he suspects anything?” Jones asked.

“How could he?” asked Mack.

In the corner cage two tom cats started an argument and the whole
cageful commented with growls and arched backs. There were only
twenty-one cats. They had fallen short of their mark.

“I wonder how we’ll get them cats over there?” Hazel began. “We can’t
carry that big cage through the door.”

“We won’t,” said Mack. “Remember how it was with the frogs. No, we’ll
just tell Doc about them. He can come over and get them.” Mack got up
and opened one of Eddie’s wining jugs. “We might as well get warmed up,”
he said.

At five-thirty the old Chinaman flap-flapped down the hill, past the
Palace. He crossed the lot, crossed the street, and disappeared between
Western Biological and the Hediondo.

At the Bear Flag the girls were getting ready. A kind of anchor watch
had been chosen by straws. The ones who stayed were to be relieved every
hour.

Dora was splendid. Her hair freshly dyed orange was curled and piled on
her head. She wore her wedding ring and a big diamond brooch on her
breast. Her dress was white silk with a black bamboo pattern. In the
bedrooms the reverse of ordinary procedure was in practice.

Those who were staying wore long evening dresses while those who were
going had on short print dresses and looked very pretty. The quilt,
finished and backed, was in a big cardboard box in the bar. The bouncer
grumbled a little, for it had been decided that he couldn’t go to the
party. Someone had to look after the house. Contrary to orders, each
girl had a pint hidden and each girl watched for the signal to fortify
herself a little for the party.

Dora strode magnificently into her office and closed the door. She
unlocked the top drawer of the rolltop desk, took out a bottle and a
glass and poured herself a snort. And the bottle clinked softly on the
glass. A girl listening outside the door heard the clink and spread the
word. Dora would not be able to smell breaths now. And the girls rushed
for their rooms and got out their pints. Dusk had come to Cannery Row,
the gray time between daylight and street light. Phyllis Mae peeked
around the curtain in the front parlor.

“Can you see him?” Doris asked.

“Yeah. He’s got the lights on. He’s sitting there like he’s reading.
Jesus, how that guy does read. You’d think he’d ruin his eyes. He’s got
a glass of beer in his hand.”

“Well,” said Doris, “we might as well have a little one, I guess.”

Phyllis Mae was still limping a little but she was as good as new. She
could, she said, lick her weight in City Councilmen. “Seems kind of
funny,” she said. “There he is, sitting over there and he don’t know
what’s going to happen.”

“He never comes in here for a trick,” Doris said a little sadly.

“Lot of guys don’t want to pay,” said Phyllis Mae. “Costs them more but
they figure it different.”

“Well, hell, maybe he likes them.”

“Likes who?”

“Them girls that go over there.”

“Oh, yeah—maybe he does. I been over there. He never made a pass at
me.”

“He wouldn’t,” said Doris. “But that don’t mean if you didn’t work here
you wouldn’t have to fight your way out.”

“You mean he don’t like our profession?”

“No, I don’t mean that at all. He probably figures a girl that’s workin’
has got a different attitude.”

They had another small snort.

In her office Dora poured herself one more, swallowed it and locked the
drawer again. She fixed her perfect hair in the wall mirror, inspected
her shining red nails, and went out to the bar. Alfred the bouncer was
sulking. It wasn’t anything he said nor was his expression unpleasant,
but he was sulking just the same. Dora looked him over coldly. “I guess
you figure you’re getting the blocks, don’t you?”

“No,” said Alfred. “No, it’s quite all right.”

That quite threw Dora. “Quite all right, is it? You got a job, Mister.
Do you want to keep it or not?”

“It’s quite all right,” Alfred said frostily. “I ain’t putting out no
beef.” He put his elbows on the bar and studied himself in the mirror.
“You just go and enjoy yourself,” he said. “I’ll take care of everything
here. You don’t need to worry.”

Dora melted under his pain. “Look,” she said. “I don’t like to have the
place without a man. Some lush might get smart and the kids couldn’t
handle him. But a little later you can come over and you could kind of
keep your eye on the place out of the window. How would that be? You
could see if anything happened.”

“Well,” said Alfred, “I would like to come.” He was mollified by her
permission. “Later I might drop over for just a minute or two. They was
a mean drunk in last night. An’ I don’t know, Dora—I kind of lost my
nerve since I bust that guy’s back. I just ain’t sure of myself no more.
I’m gonna pull a punch some night and get took.”

“You need a rest,” said Dora. “Maybe I’ll get Mack to fill in and you
can take a couple of weeks off.” She was a wonderful madam, Dora was.

Over at the laboratory, Doc had a little whiskey after his beer. He was
feeling a little mellow. It seemed a nice thing to him that they would
give him a party. He played the _Pavane to a Dead Princess_ and felt
sentimental and a little sad. And because of his feeling he went on with
_Daphnis and Chloe_. There was a passage in it that reminded him of
something else. The observers in Athens before Marathon reported seeing
a great line of dust crossing the Plain, and they heard the clash of
arms and they heard the Eleusinian Chant. There was part of the music
that reminded him of that picture.

When it was done he got another whiskey and he debated in his mind about
the _Brandenburg_. That would snap him out of the sweet and sickly mood
he was getting into. But what was wrong with the sweet and sickly mood?
It was rather pleasant. “I can play anything I want,” he said aloud. “I
can play _Clair de Lune_ or _The Maiden with Flaxen Hair_. I’m a free
man.”

He poured a whiskey and drank it. And he compromised with the _Moonlight
Sonata_. He could see the neon light of La Ida blinking on and off. And
then the street light in front of the Bear Flag came on.

A squadron of huge brown beetles hurled themselves against the light and
then fell to the ground and moved their legs and felt around with their
antennae. A lady cat strolled lonesomely along the gutter looking for
adventure. She wondered what had happened to all the tom cats who had
made life interesting and the nights hideous.

Mr. Malloy on his hands and knees peered out of the boiler door to see
if anyone had gone to the party yet. In the Palace the boys sat
restlessly watching the black hands of the alarm clock.


                               CHAPTER 30

THE NATURE of parties has been imperfectly studied. It is, however,
generally understood that a party has a pathology, that it is a kind of
an individual and that it is likely to be a very perverse individual.
And it is also generally understood that a party hardly ever goes the
way it is planned or intended. This last, of course, excludes those
dismal slave parties, whipped and controlled and dominated, given by
ogreish professional hostesses. These are not parties at all but acts
and demonstrations, about as spontaneous as peristalsis and as
interesting as its end product.

Probably everyone in Cannery Row had projected his imagination to how
the party would be—the shouts of greeting, the congratulation, the
noise and good feeling. And it didn’t start that way at all. Promptly at
eight o’clock Mack and the boys, combed and clean, picked up their jugs
and marched down the chicken walk, over the railroad track, through the
lot across the street and up the steps of Western Biological. Everyone
was embarrassed. Doc held the door open and Mack made a little speech.
“Being as how it’s your birthday, I and the boys thought we would wish
you happy birthday and we got twenty-one cats for you for a present.”

He stopped and they stood forlornly on the stairs.

“Come on in,” said Doc. “Why—I’m—I’m surprised. I didn’t even know you
knew it was my birthday.”

“All tom cats,” said Hazel. “We didn’t bring ’em down.”

They sat down formally in the room at the left. There was a long
silence. “Well,” said Doc, “now you’re here, how about a little drink?”

Mack said, “We brought a little snort,” and he indicated the three jugs
Eddie had been accumulating. “They ain’t no beer in it,” said Eddie.

Doc covered his early evening reluctance. “No,” he said. “You’ve got to
have a drink with me. It just happens I laid in some whiskey.”

They were just seated formally, sipping delicately at the whiskey, when
Dora and the girls came in. They presented the quilt. Doc laid it over
his bed and it was beautiful. And they accepted a little drink. Mr. and
Mrs. Malloy followed with their presents.

“Lots of folks don’t know what this stuff’s going to be worth,” said Sam
Malloy as he brought out the Chalmers 1916 piston and connecting rod.
“There probably isn’t three of these here left in the world.”

And now people began to arrive in droves. Henri came in with a
pincushion three by four feet. He wanted to give a lecture on his new
art form but by this time the formality was broken. Mr. and Mrs. Gay
came in. Lee Chong presented the great string of firecrackers and the
China lily bulbs. Someone ate the lily bulbs by eleven o’clock but the
firecrackers lasted longer. A group of comparative strangers came in
from La Ida. The stiffness was going out of the party quickly. Dora sat
in a kind of throne, her orange hair flaming. She held her whiskey glass
daintily with her little finger extended. And she kept an eye on the
girls to see that they conducted themselves properly. Doc put dance
music on the phonograph and he went to the kitchen and began to fry the
steaks.

The first fight was not a bad one. One of the group from La Ida made an
immoral proposal to one of Dora’s girls. She protested and Mack and the
boys, outraged at this breach of propriety, threw him out quickly and
without breaking anything. They felt good then, for they knew they were
contributing.

Out in the kitchen Doc was frying steaks in three skillets, and he cut
up tomatoes and piled up sliced bread. He felt very good. Mack was
personally taking care of the phonograph. He had found an album of Benny
Goodman’s trios. Dancing had started, indeed the party was beginning to
take on depth and vigor. Eddie went into the office and did a tap dance.
Doc had taken a pint with him to the kitchen and he helped himself from
the bottle. He was feeling better and better. Everyone was surprised
when he served the meat. Nobody was really hungry and they cleaned it up
instantly. Now the food set the party into a kind of rich digestive
sadness. The whiskey was gone and Doc brought out the gallons of wine.

Dora, sitting enthroned, said, “Doc, play some of that nice music. I get
Christ awful sick of that juke box over home.”

Then Doc played _Ardo_ and the _Amor_ from an album of Monteverdi. And
the guests sat quietly and their eyes were inward. Dora breathed beauty.
Two newcomers crept up the stairs and entered quietly. Doc was feeling a
golden pleasant sadness. The guests were silent when the music stopped.
Doc brought out a book and he read in a clear, deep voice:

     Even now
     If I see in my soul the citron-breasted fair one
     Still gold-tinted, her face like our night stars,
     Drawing unto her; her body beaten about with flame,
     Wounded by the flaring spear of love,
     My first of all by reason of her fresh years,
     Then is my heart buried alive in snow.

     Even now
     If my girl with lotus eyes came to me again
     Weary with the dear weight of young love,
     Again I would give her to these starved twins of arms
     And from her mouth drink down the heavy wine,
     As a reeling pirate bee in fluttered ease
     Steals up the honey from the nenuphar.

     Even now
     If I saw her lying all wide eyes
     And with collyrium the indent of her cheek
     Lengthened to the bright ear and her pale side
     So suffering the fever of my distance,
     Then would my love for her be ropes of flowers, and night
     A black-haired lover on the breasts of day.

     Even now
     My eyes that hurry to see no more are painting, painting
     Faces of my lost girl. O golden rings
     That tap against cheeks of small magnolia leaves,
     O whitest so soft parchment where
     My poor divorcèd lips have written excellent
     Stanzas of kisses, and will write no more.

     Even now
     Death sends me the flickering of powdery lids
     Over wild eyes and the pity of her slim body
     All broken up with the weariness of joy;
     The little red flowers of her breasts to be my comfort
     Moving above scarves, and for my sorrow
     Wet crimson lips that once I marked as mine.

     Even now
     They chatter her weakness through the two bazaars
     Who was so strong to love me. And small men
     That buy and sell for silver being slaves
     Crinkle the fat about their eyes; and yet
     No Prince of the Cities of the Sea has taken her,
     Leading to his grim bed. Little lonely one,
     You clung to me as a garment clings; my girl.

     Even now
     I love long black eyes that caress like silk,
     Ever and ever sad and laughing eyes,
     Whose lids make such sweet shadow when they close
     It seems another beautiful look of hers.
     I love a fresh mouth, ah, a scented mouth.
     And curving hair, subtle as a smoke,
     And light fingers, and laughter of green gems.

     Even now
     I remember that you made answer very softly,
     We being one soul, your hand on my hair,
     The burning memory rounding your near lips:
     I have seen the priestesses of Rati make love at moon fall
     And then in a carpeted hall with a bright gold lamp
     Lie down carelessly anywhere to sleep.[1]

Phyllis Mae was openly weeping when he stopped and Dora herself dabbed
at her eyes. Hazel was so taken by the sound of the words that he had
not listened to their meaning. But a little world sadness had slipped
over all of them. Everyone was remembering a lost love, everyone a call.

Mack said, “Jesus, that’s pretty. Reminds me of a dame—” and he let it
pass. They filled the wine glasses and became quiet. The party was
slipping away in sweet sadness. Eddie went out in the office and did a
little tap dance and came back and sat down again. The party was about
to recline and go to sleep when there was a tramp of feet on the stairs.
A great voice shouted, “Where’s the girls?”

Mack got up almost happily and crossed quickly to the door. And a smile
of joy illuminated the faces of Hughie and Jones. “What girls you got in
mind?” Mack asked softly.

“Ain’t this a whore house? Cab driver said they was one down here.”

“You made a mistake, Mister.” Mack’s voice was gay.

“Well, what’s them dames in there?”

They joined battle then. They were the crew of a San Pedro tuna boat,
good hard happy fight-wise men. With the first rush they burst through
to the party. Dora’s girls had each one slipped off a shoe and held it
by the toe. As the fight raged by they would clip a man on the head with
the spike heel. Dora leaped for the kitchen and came roaring out with a
meat grinder. Even Doc was happy. He flailed about with the Chalmers
1916 piston and connecting rod.

It was a good fight. Hazel tripped and got kicked in the face twice
before he could get to his feet again. The Franklin stove went over with
a crash. Driven to a corner the newcomers defended themselves with heavy
books from the bookcases. But gradually they were driven back. The two
front windows were broken out. Suddenly Alfred, who had heard the
trouble from across the street, attacked from the rear with his favorite
weapon, an indoor ball bat. The fight raged down the steps and into the
street and across into the lot. The front door was hanging limply from
one hinge again. Doc’s shirt was torn off and his slight strong shoulder
dripped blood from a scratch. The enemy was driven halfway up the lot
when the sirens sounded. Doc’s birthday party had barely time to get
inside the laboratory and wedge the broken door closed and turn out the
lights before the police car cruised up. The cops didn’t find anything.
But the party was sitting in the dark giggling happily and drinking
wine. The shift changed at the Bear Flag. The fresh contingent raged in
full of hell. And then the party really got going. The cops came back,
looked in, clicked their tongues and joined it. Mack and the boys used
the squad car to go to Jimmy Brucia’s for more wine and Jimmy came back
with them. You could hear the roar of the party from end to end of
Cannery Row. The party had all the best qualities of a riot and a night
on the barricades. The crew from the San Pedro tuna boat crept humbly
back and joined the party. They were embraced and admired. A woman five
blocks away called the police to complain about the noise and couldn’t
get anyone. The cops reported their own car stolen and found it later on
the beach. Doc sitting cross-legged on the table smiled and tapped his
fingers gently on his knee. Mack and Phyllis Mae were doing Indian
wrestling on the floor. And the cool bay wind blew in through the broken
windows. It was then that someone lighted the twenty-five-foot string of
firecrackers.

[1] “Black Marigolds,” translated from the Sanskrit by E. Powys Mathers.


                               CHAPTER 31

A WELL-GROWN gopher took up residence in a thicket of mallow weeds in
the vacant lot on Cannery Row. It was a perfect place. The deep green
luscious mallows towered up crisp and rich and as they matured their
little cheeses hung down provocatively. The earth was perfect for a
gopher hole too, black and soft and yet with a little clay in it so that
it didn’t crumble and the tunnels didn’t cave in. The gopher was fat and
sleek and he had always plenty of food in his cheek pouches. His little
ears were clean and well set and his eyes were as black as old-fashioned
pin heads and just about the same size. His digging hands were strong
and the fur on his back was glossy brown and the fawn-colored fur on his
chest was incredibly soft and rich. He had long curving yellow teeth and
a little short tail. Altogether he was a beautiful gopher and in the
prime of his life.

He came to the place over land and found it good and he began his burrow
on a little eminence where he could look out among the mallow weeds and
see the trucks go by on Cannery Row. He could watch the feet of Mack and
the boys as they crossed the lot to the Palace Flophouse. As he dug down
into the coal-black earth he found it even more perfect, for there were
great rocks under the soil. When he made his great chamber for the
storing of food it was under a rock so that it could never cave in no
matter how hard it rained. It was a place where he could settle down and
raise any number of families and the burrow could increase in all
directions.

It was beautiful in the early morning when he first poked his head out
of the burrow. The mallows filtered green light down on him and the
first rays of the rising sun shone into his hole and warmed it so that
he lay there content and very comfortable.

When he had dug his great chamber and his four emergency exits and his
waterproof deluge room, the gopher began to store food. He cut down only
the perfect mallow stems and trimmed them to the exact length he needed
and he took them down the hole and stacked them neatly in his great
chamber, and arranged them so they wouldn’t ferment or get sour. He had
found the perfect place to live. There were no gardens about so no one
would think of setting a trap for him. Cats there were, many of them,
but they were so bloated with fish heads and guts from the canneries
that they had long ago given up hunting. The soil was sandy enough so
that water never stood about or filled a hole for long. The gopher
worked and worked until he had his great chamber crammed with food. Then
he made little side chambers for the babies who would inhabit them. In a
few years there might be thousands of his progeny spreading out from
this original hearthstone.

But as time went on the gopher began to be a little impatient, for no
female appeared. He sat in the entrance of his hole in the morning and
made penetrating squeaks that are inaudible to the human ear but can be
heard deep in the earth by other gophers. And still no female appeared.
Finally in a sweat of impatience he went up across the track until he
found another gopher hole. He squeaked provocatively in the entrance. He
heard a rustling and smelled female and then out of the hole came an old
battle-torn bull gopher who mauled and bit him so badly that he crept
home and lay in his great chamber for three days recovering and he lost
two toes from one front paw from that fight.

Again he waited and squeaked beside his beautiful burrow in the
beautiful place but no female ever came and after a while he had to move
away. He had to move two blocks up the hill to a dahlia garden where
they put out traps every night.


                               CHAPTER 32

DOC AWAKENED very slowly and clumsily like a fat man getting out of a
swimming pool. His mind broke the surface and fell back several times.
There was red lipstick on his beard. He opened one eye, saw the
brilliant colors of the quilt and closed his eye quickly. But after a
while he looked again. His eye went past the quilt to the floor, to the
broken plate in the corner, to the glasses standing on the table turned
over on the floor, to the spilled wine and the books like heavy fallen
butterflies. There were little bits of curled red paper all over the
place and the sharp smell of firecrackers. He could see through the
kitchen door to the steak plates stacked high and the skillets deep in
grease. Hundreds of cigarette butts were stamped out on the floor. And
under the firecracker smell was a fine combination of wine and whiskey
and perfume. His eye stopped for a moment on a little pile of hairpins
in the middle of the floor.

He rolled over slowly and supporting himself on one elbow he looked out
the broken window. Cannery Row was quiet and sunny. The boiler door was
open. The door of the Palace Flophouse was closed. A man slept
peacefully among the weeds in the vacant lot. The Bear Flag was shut up
tight.

Doc got up and went into the kitchen and lighted the gas water heater on
his way to the toilet. Then he came back and sat on the edge of his bed
and worked his toes together while he surveyed the wreckage. From up the
hill he could hear the church bells ringing. When the gas heater began
rumbling he went back to the bathroom and took a shower and he put on
blue jeans and a flannel shirt. Lee Chong was closed but he saw who was
at the door and opened it. He went to the refrigerator and brought out a
quart of beer without being asked. Doc paid him.

“Good time?” Lee asked. His brown eyes were a little inflamed in their
pouches.

“Good time!” said Doc and he went back to the laboratory with his cold
beer. He made a peanut butter sandwich to eat with his beer. It was very
quiet in the street. No one went by at all. Doc heard music in his
head—violas and cellos, he thought. And they played cool, soft,
soothing music with nothing much to distinguish it. He ate his sandwich
and sipped his beer and listened to the music. When he had finished his
beer, Doc went into the kitchen, and cleared the dirty dishes out of the
sink. He ran hot water in it and poured soap chips under the running
water so that the foam stood high and white. Then he moved about
collecting all the glasses that weren’t broken. He put them in the soapy
hot water. The steak plates were piled high on the stove with their
brown juice and their white grease sticking them together. Doc cleared a
place on the table for the clean glasses as he washed them. Then he
unlocked the door of the back room and brought out one of his albums of
Gregorian music and he put a Pater Noster and Agnus Dei on the turntable
and started it going. The angelic, disembodied voices filled the
laboratory. They were incredibly pure and sweet. Doc worked carefully
washing the glasses so that they would not clash together and spoil the
music. The boys’ voices carried the melody up and down, simply but with
the richness that is in no other singing. When the record had finished,
Doc wiped his hands and turned it off. He saw a book lying half under
his bed and picked it up and he sat down on the bed. For a moment he
read to himself but then his lips began to move and in a moment he read
aloud—slowly, pausing at the end of each line.

       Even now
       I mind the coming and talking of wise men from towers
       Where they had thought away their youth. And I, listening,
       Found not the salt of the whispers of my girl,
       Murmur of confused colors, as we lay near sleep;
       Little wise words and little witty words,
       Wanton as water, honied with eagerness.

In the sink the high white foam cooled and ticked as the bubbles burst.
Under the piers it was very high tide and the waves splashed on rocks
they had not reached in a long time.

           Even now
           I mind that I loved cypress and roses, clear,
           The great blue mountains and the small gray hills,
           The sounding of the sea. Upon a day
           I saw strange eyes and hands like butterflies;
           For me at morning larks flew from the thyme
           And children came to bathe in little streams.

Doc closed the book. He could hear the waves beat under the piles and he
could hear the scampering of white rats against the wire. He went into
the kitchen and felt the cooling water in the sink. He ran hot water
into it. He spoke aloud to the sink and the white rats, and to himself:

          Even now,
          I know that I have savored the hot taste of life
          Lifting green cups and gold at the great feast.
          Just for a small and a forgotten time
          I have had full in my eyes from off my girl
          The whitest pouring of eternal light—

He wiped his eyes with the back of his hand. And the white rats
scampered and scrambled in their cages. And behind the glass the
rattlesnakes lay still and stared into space with their dusty frowning
eyes.

                                THE END